# Easter on Seitseminen

Thanks to Jesus, I had a 4-day-long weekend. I realised that a bit late, and prepared the trip in a rush. I spent an hour looking for a nice hiking area, close enough from my place, reachable with public transports. I spent as much time packing my backpack. Seitseminen National Park is 27 km walk from the train station. Whereas most of the snow melted on the coast, some areas of the park had still enough snow to put your entire legs into it, if – like me – you forgot snowshoes. I took my thru-hiker boots with winter gaiters, but I could feel snow to my bones. The temperature was decent though: 3 °C average, -5 min. 11 max. Entrances and most intersections of the park have signs and maps, so I figured out a circuit once arrived. If I had snowshoes, I would have been off-track to keep exploring for one more day. I managed to do the big loop – Virkatie – with some detours. Spring is quickly coming despite the snow cover and icy lakes: birds, vegetation, spiders, hikers, long days are back. On the other hand, I did not spot a single Reindeer or the European Pine Marten. One part of the forest was looking rather burnt, but the Finnish government – Metsähallitus – intentionally burns areas for ecological restoration. This practice is also used in the Australian Outback, and it is part of the aboriginal ritual. But shit happened in the history, where the fire got out of control. Water flowing rivers was not crystal clear, more like bubble tea, probably due to the melting snow mixed with earth. Drinking untreated water from flooded rivers is not recommended. But I had just enough in my backpack. 58 km, 2.5 days, 5 L of water, 5 carrots, 1 apple, and 1 foot band-aid later, I finished the trip and hitchhiked back home.
