# Winter Immersion in Lapland

### Plan & Purpose

Winter is my favourite season in Lapland because it is a great environment for backcountry skiing and the scenery is just magical. While [the last ski trip](story:Backcountry_Ski_Touring_Urho_Kekkonen) was about discovering both the terrain and the activity, this trip was an immersion into the remote wilderness. An immersion in all weathers, pitching my tent in all conditions, as far away from hotels, roads, and campsites as possible, more to connect with nature than to challenge myself, more to photograph nature than to crash test myself. The location has been selected without hesitation, Lemmenjoki is the Finland's largest national park, with the vast Lake Inarijärvi to the north and other protected areas to the south. I started with my sled in Partakko – north of Inarijärvi, 60km drive from Inari – and finished in Kalmakaltio – 60km drive east of Hetta. Carrying 50 kilos of winter expedition equipment and [food](https://blog.explorewilder.com/backcountry-cooking.html) is a challenge, but I managed to use only train, bus, and taxi. No plane, no private car, to keep my holiday as environmentally friendly as possible. Nature is a fragile playground. Lemmenjoki became world-famous after the discovery of gold, but friends are worth more than gold and I would like to thank those who supported me, thank you!

### Frozen Lakes & Forest

From home to Partakko, there are four transfers and two days of travelling by train and bus. Each transfer was a training session. I carried my sled on a cheap trolley, and my equipment in two shopping bags. I left the trolley and the bags in Partakko, put my gear into my sled, my skis on my boots, continued a kilometre, and pitched my tent under a starry sky. The next day, I opened my eyes, motivated myself to get out of my sleeping bag and comfortable mattress, cooked porridge in my big tent, packed everything, skied all day with a couple of snack breaks and many photo breaks, pitched my tent, cooked dinner, melted snow to fill my thermos, slept okay-ish with a few nonsense dreams. Typical day. The next ones were very similar in habits and different in mood, weather, environment, snow conditions. The first days were on frozen lakes, exposed to the wind, but fast going because the snow was flattened and the snowmobile route was marked with poles. It was around 0°C, surprisingly warm, which probably weakened the ice layer. Between the lakes there are forests with deep snow outside the snowmobile tracks, which makes progress and navigation easier. The forest is a wind stopper, and the deep snow is nice when it comes to pitching my tent with my 30 cm-long pegs. But one night, I deliberately [pitched against the wind](https://odysee.com/@ExploreWilder:b/Tour_of_My_Winter_Expedition_Tent:6), not strong wind, just exposed enough to practice and learn in safe conditions. Pressurised snow made my mittens wet, and I tried to dry them with my cooker. One side is synthetic leather which can withstand the heat, but the other side, made of thin nylon, is fragile and started to melt... I made holes, but it was not too bad, I had a repair kit and spare mittens. Skiing across the frozen lakes was easy, but still required attention. Lake Menesjärvi was confusing with lots of unmarked tracks and poor visibility – due to fog, snowfall, and my goggles. Forests are a challenge for navigation: Cross or follow streams? Zigzag up, down, or follow the elevation? On the other hand, forests are home to wildlife and I have seen reindeer and snow grouse.

### Top & Bottom

Perfect conditions: good-looking clouds for photos, enough wind to feel fresh. Even though I was off track, it was easy to go up hill on the frozen snow. My alarm was not loud enough to wake me up, although I was not in deep sleep. So I arrived late at Morgam Viipus. So I enjoyed the sunset over all of Lapland, but I continued on overnight. I thought the descent would be easy but the steep slope was a real pain with the sled. Once down, I crossed the stream where it was frozen enough, headed to the hut, took a deep breath to relax myself in this peaceful night, and looked up. I saw stars and the most unexpected thing: a green flare that appeared and disappeared by magic: eureka, aurora borealis! I continued uphill and reached the hut where I could dry my wet clothes and sleeping bag and warm myself up: the reward after the pain. The next day was just as hard. I started to follow the markers, but this was not a popular winter trail: no footprints, no snowmobile tracks. The hills in this area are aggressive, with countless ups and downs, and scattered steep blocks. The climb was harder than I had expected from my topographical map, which showed elevation lines every five metres. High enough, I could have continued on the ridge, but I chose to descend to the stream in the hope of finding better terrain. It was a mistake. The descent was so steep that my sled went out of control. Trees between me and my sled stopped our descent instantly, not only once, but twice. Unfortunately the stream was not frozen and my sled fell into it. I was disappointed to find water in my sled the day after drying my gear in the only hut I would pass through on this trip. I took my sled out of the water and quickly threw snow in to soak up the water before it could freeze, and pitched my tent. No stars in the sky, but in STAR mode: Stop, Think, Assess, React. Thanks to my mistakes, I knew better how to read the topography and where to go. The next day, I climbed the hill and finally reached the plain.

### Refreshing Heaven

Same weather every day, but less snowfall, more light, colder every day. The terrain was like nothing I had ever seen before: empty flat hills, treeless, nothing, all white. High fog made everything look white, with a barely visible line separating the whitish sky from the endless snow. It felt like heaven, fresh heaven.

### Keep Exploring

Lapland can be harsh. I could have had a storm or -30°C. I was prepared for the worst, but I had decent weather, sunny spells, patchy snow, wet snow, moderate wind, bloody sky at sunset. The temperature was between 3°C and -26°C, average -5°C, warmer than [last winter](story:Backcountry_Ski_Touring_Urho_Kekkonen). I feel the need to do more, longer, harder. I gain experience with every trip, and get more motivated for the next adventure. I am not superhuman, you can do the same, start with half a day, then a day, a weekend, then... there is no limit. Nature is addictive and healthy. Every time I return home, I feel the need to share. On this trip, I focused on wide-angle landscape and wildlife photography. February is surprisingly much brighter than the dark New Year period. So I had the opportunity to capture winter in a different light. The trip was long enough to cover a variety of landscapes and I still have a lot to discover in this backcountry.
