# Lewis to Arthur’s Pass

I hitched to Engineers Camp with an overnight stay in Blacks Point because hitchhiking along the Lewis Pass take a long time. I was disappointed to see the “no public access” sign on the bridge over the Boyle River. I had lunch under a bus shelter due to patchy rain. I got a manuka pole and doubtfully crossed the river. Indeed, it’s an intimidating wide river but actually easy to cross. I considered the rainy days as a psychological test that didn’t bothered me since my mood was finally recharged. The walk to Doubtful Hut was cool bananas.

My tramp through the Doubtful valley resumed with a fine sky, almost blue with some low and high clouds. I spotted a Kāreārea there, black and white feathers, long tail, mostly white on its belly, quiet. I crossed a few creeks and headed to Lake Man Biv – 1,503 m. I had cheese and Vegemite wraps with a cup of brewed coffee. It was midday when I ventured myself to the lake. A lake is source of life, but Lake Man was icy, nothing moving but ice melting and splitting. My first plan was to walk back to the hut, but the surrounding mountains with Mt Lakeman as the highest top – 1,782 m – motivated me to do more. It was actually the hardest part of the day, steep, no path, no advises from the Intentions Book. In other words, I was literally exploring. One side of the mountain was snowy and the other side was bluffy – hard tramping, easy climbing, heart pounding.

During the night, I was woken up a few times by a scattered rain knocking the roof that was less than half a metre far from my ears. At first light, the mountain was covered of snow. I could see the vapors of my breathing. I was cold and reluctant going outside the hut. I’ve waited an hour or so for the weather to improve. Indeed, snowfall diminished and pushed myself uphill. Tramping on snow without crampons is slow going, I slipped a few times. Indeed, only two inches of snow on tussock is very slippery. The environment was so different that I could barely recognize where I had been through. The route above the bushline was hidden but poles helped me navigating. Half of the track below the bushline was marked and easy to follow, steep though. The other half along the creek to the river, bush-bashing through tawhai was okay, not as dense as manuka, but I preferred following the stream bed, crossing it countless times. Finally, patches of blue sky appeared, gooses, paradise ducks, tomtits, fantails, robins, kakaruais flew in the wide and flat Hope Valley. Once the river crossed, tramping to Hope Kiwi Lodge was a kid game and scenic. The track alternates between the grassy flat and the old beech forest. I had a hard, snowy and freezing tramp the morning, and a pleasant walkway the afternoon, warm and sunny. No clouds overnight, so many stars.

I cruised to Hurunui Hut in six hours and surprised myself by not eating any snack for four tramping days. I only had cheese and Vegemite wraps for lunch. I actually eat less in a good mood. That’s perhaps why I was feeling tired early afternoon despite good track and weather conditions.

Next day was under widespread rain. Flooded side streams to the Hurunui river was okay to cross, as well as a waterfall to climb and a slip to negotiate. Wind was strong and I imagined how red would became a red beech tree if it fell on me. The funny part was the 3-wire bridge. I always feel like performing a circus tour with a yellow painted elephant on my back. I stopped in the tiny orange Lake Man Biv. Rain continued, heavy clouds and lightnings were at the party.

Starting a day with dry socks is luxury. Luxury was a dream. It wasn’t that bad though, vegetation was amazingly diverse through the Harper Pass. I could see red cabbage trees and kahikatea / white pine on the pass – 962 m – and many other species in Locke Stream (No.4) Hut where I stopped for the day, waiting for the flooded stream to recede.

Next day was a performance in my honest opinion. I woke up at 5:30am, had breakfast, cleaned the hut and left the place at 7am. I got my shoes wet again after the Taramakau River crossing. Weather at the moment was fine so I’ve decided – after a 2-day long hesitation – to go to the Minchin Pass via Townsend Creek, it’s a gorgy stream “impassable after heavy rain.” Fresh snow was not good for a sidle from Townsend Hut – that was plan A of my itinerary. The creek was hard to climb and negotiate. There were no poles, no markers except a 200 m-long section. Some cairns in the middle of the stream advised me to stay in the water – and boulder-hopping despite the high current – instead of the forest where dense vegetation made bush-bashing very slow going. Almost on top of the pass, bush-bashing was easier with sub-alpine vegetation and poles guiding me to Minchin Biv. I went down to the lake with less river crossing but more bush-bashing. Whereas fighting vegetation with my whole body, I hurt my face with a branch. I could feel it and see blood but I didn’t mind. My purpose was to succeed and I could always say I’ve fought a Māori. To be honest, it wasn’t bad though, even if I can still see the impact on my skin, months later. I was actually disappointed since I found myself on the wrong side of the river and I’ve torn the rain cover of my backpack, again. Once the river crossed, I finally found a well marked and clean track avoiding a gorge. The top of that section has a lookout with a view of the valley and a yellow dot: the Minchin Biv roof. Vegetation changed between the Harper and the Poulter Valleys. I found male towhai rauriki / Mountain Beech trees with tiny red flowers I’ve never seen before. I skipped Poulter hut and stopped at Trust / Poulter Hut. There I met a bunch of trampers. A girl said that my face “got hurt nicely.” I fell asleep no longer after 9:30pm.

The last day of the tramp was longer in distance but much easier. The Poulter Valley was very wide with grassy flats and some flourishing trees. The Binser Saddle Track was clean. I hitched from Goldney Saddle – BV21 977368 – on the Arthur’s Pass highway, back to Greymouth. Crossing valleys made a rich tramp with doubtful moments, unpredictable weather, and I had just enough food.

The Otira Bridge broke down the next day due to flood. The highway closed but I was already in Greymouth, lucky as!
