# Pouakai Circuit

I became a surveyor on my way to New Plymouth. I helped a professional to keep standing a highly accurate GPS (± 20 mm) in Taumaranui. Then we got muffins and Wild Bean coffees at the BP station. I got another coffee and a nice meal in Birdie, New Plymouth. To be honest, I do not miss the French food at all since the Kiwi gastronomy is great. Even though I eat dehydrated and freeze-dried food on the go, I have to confess that I enjoy fine food before and after every single tramp.

I don't have much navigation skills but motivation to learn and challenging myself has never been so strong. Therefore, I got an expensive Garmin 64sc handheld GPS, so that I can see where I'm going, manage my tracks, log waypoints. I won't get lost anymore, hurrah!

After some bush-shopping in hunting and fishing stores, I hitched toward Mount Egmont / Taranaki for the Pouakai Circuit. I met David on my way to the national park who offered me to stay in his place. Again I was surprised how much Kiwis (Māoris as well as Pakehas) are open-minded and open to visitors. Again I said to myself “I don't deserve so much kindness!” Kim, David's wife, is a portrait photographer. If only my web gallery were ready at that time, that would be a great support for sharing my stories. I guess I was a guest because of my stories that locals like to listen. I do like to discover and live a different lifestyle as well, especially opposite to mine. The house had a garden, the couple was a businessman and a photographer with four kids, a few dogs, one cat, two cars, one goat that can jump over the fence, etc.

I was off the next morning, back to wilderness. The track was super scenic but muddy, easy to follow without navigation skills. It was the opportunity to try my brand-new GPS. I met a couple of tourists at the end of the circuit, they have been to Base One near Mt Everest, Scandinavia, South America, Africa... That's the most healthy retired couple I've ever met, enjoying life more than most teenagers!
