# Gillespie Circuit

That trip was part of my *Three Months Tramping Non-Stop* adventure. I recharged myself in Wanaka, New Zealand, got a nice coffee, piece of cake, food for five days, and a short visit in the Department of Conservative centre.

Thanks to good conditions, I’ve decided to cross the wide Makarora River first because river crossing is very weather dependent. That river is about 800 m wide, divided in multiple streams. I knew it would be “challenging” but not that much. I’ve spent hours late afternoon negotiating the river, looking for the best way to cross it safely. But I could not. I’ve retreated at ¾ of the river, flow was too strong on the last quarter. Therefore, I pitched my tent on high ground. In the meantime, I discovered that I could hear like a fish, with my ear on a wood stick stuck in the bottom of the river. The effect has much more dynamism than listening to the sea with a shell.

I said to myself “it isn’t a fail because each attempt was safe – knowing my limits and how to cross safely – and I will try again tomorrow morning if weather permits.” Next morning, I tried again and again and – whereas hesitating to retreat – I finally succeeded. I found a good way, with water up to my pelvis – at a point you really feel how cold is the water. I blame snow melt. I marked my way with an arrow made of rocks, and a pole in case I had to come back this way.

Next part to Siberia Hut was easy – similar to the Hope Valley between the Lewis and the Arthur’s Pass: alternating between grassy flat and forest. Then I found a chain of high waterfalls from the snowy tops to the river at the bottom of the valley.

I woke up at 4am by a noisy party of trampers (packing their packs in the sleeping room, instead of the living room.) They were scared of the rather pessimistic DOC weather forecast: “rain and gale late afternoon.” I could see them heading to the pass while I was making my porridge at 5:30am. Actually, the world is for early birds, and weather was great all day. I was heading to Lake Crucible at 7am. The first kilometre were about following the valley on grassy flat. Then reasonably steeply up in the beech forest after an easy-grade river crossing. Then zig-zagging from the forest to flat tussock above the bushline – with a pretty stream to cross. Finally, the route goes up to the lake front surrounded by snowy mountains. The lake was obviously not warm enough for a swim, it was all covered of ice. Two avalanche triggered within a few minutes. I’m always impressed by avalanches, the noise it makes when cracking is chilling.

I walked down through the same route and up to the pass. The climb is moderate, but I was smelling something fishy when – almost at the top – I realised that I couldn’t skip snow. I had to walk on it for about a hundred metres. That wasn’t that steep but challenging without ice-axe and crampons. Going down was much easier since oriented on the sunny side of the mountain. I pitched my tent at the bottom of Mt Awful instead of going to the hut because of the stunning view and good weather conditions.

To sum up, the two doubtful sections of the Gillespie circuit were the Makarora River and the snow walk on the pass. The first was the most challenging river crossing ever (in a technical point of view), and the second was just unsafe without basic mountaineering gear. I had not only finished the circuit but successfully completed the whole 3-month spring adventure!
