# The Écrins

The Écrins National Park is located between Grenoble, Gap, and Briançon, France. I found an original way to cross the park from north-west to south-east. I've been through quite a few saddles and stayed below 3,000 m.

* **Day 1:** The trip began end-afternoon around Bourg-d'Oisans where I got a paper topo map and enjoyed a wood-fired pizza. I hesitated to get a milkshake in addition, but I would not deserve it – it would be like looking at a stunning view without the hard walk. I spotted a squirrel on my first steps into the Oisans forest. I walked until dusk and found a wooden bivy. It had no floor, all dust covered, I could see stars through the roof holes. Back to the forest, I didn't want anything more!
* **Day 2:** I like walking a bit before having breakfast, to enjoy it with a woken mouth and stomach. I found wild raspberries on my way but no water source for a while. I was heading to {Lac}="lake" du Vallon. It was 6.2 km off-track navigation around steep scree and bluffs. I had patchy drizzle but most of the day was sunny until end-afternoon. I pitched my tent next to the lake and had mashed potatoes just before the storm, the thunder was stressful, and I could slightly feel the vibrating ground. The peaks surrounding me would catch the exceeding energy!
* **Day 3:** The morning weather was nice and fresh, I was screening the terrain while eating a berry porridge. I couldn't guess my way which was finally very similar to [Lochnagar](story:Rees_Lochnagar_Dart), with no guiding advice. Indeed, I didn't have time to gather information, I only had my digital+paper topo map. Basically, I climbed up to the ridge because it was too risky on the steep side. Once on top, I continued a bit and walked down hill on the other side to reach the GR54B (a cryptic name meaning *French Great Walk 54 Alternative B*.) That track was clean and marked. I passed a saddle – Brèche du Périer – two other lakes – Plan Vianney and Lauvitel – another saddle – Col du Vallon – and another lake – Muzelle. I spotted a couple of Alpine Ibex, found plenty of blueberries and some raspberries along the path, a real fest!
* **Day 4:** Today consisted in following a track, up and down, and up again, and down again. Similarly to the [Pyrénées](story:Pyrenees) and the [Mercantour](story:Trou_Ane), ridges are rather broken so it's about passing saddles, harder for my sool than for my legs – “1000 m up, 1000 m down, repeat.” Staying on the ridge is funnier but generally tougher, and the bottom of the valley is often bitumen therefore uninteresting. The weather was nice and warm, too warm! I was sweating all day and night. I found redberries on my way but wildlife is almost non-existent or very shy, few marmots, birds, on the other hand the micro-world is rich with many insects – flying grasshoppers, all kind of butterflies, blue scarabs – and I spotted a {vipere}="Vipera aspis atra".
* **Day 5:** I set the alarm at 4am and open my eyes 22 minutes later. I rolled my tent under the stars partially covered by clouds, and started walking torch on with my empty stomach. I was hundreds metres up hill when the sun rose and I could see the streetlights of the village turning off. I had my porridge with a redberries topping and continued up and down to the Villar-Loubière ghost town but busy campground. It could be my under-trained legs, my 20+ kg backpack, the countless blueberry breaks, or the cumulated elevation I've walked... but I was slower than my expectations, or my expectations were higher than ever. Anyway, performance wasn't my priority. When I walked through the campground, the manager asked me if I was just passing or if I needed something. “Well, what do you have for lunch? – Cheese pastry with salad for appetizer, then raviole gratin carried on with an organic local cheese tasting, and a melting chocolate for dessert. – Is everything vegetarian? – Yes it is!” If you say “no thanks, I'm tramping non-stop with no food re-supply” then you found a real passion in life. If you say “oh yeah, let's taste random local food” then you're like me! After getting some cooking ideas, I dived into the majestic *Kings' Forest* (Bois des Rois), nice trees with moss, some wild strawberries and raspberries, and frogs jumping around – it was poor rain. I intentionally chose the less used track to entertain myself even more – with a narrow track and fallen trees. The storm really stroke when I reached the tree line. I was very close to my intended campground – the lakes – when the thunder stroke only a couple of seconds after the lightning. I was running along the sections open to the sky, and rested hidden in the patchy forest, hidden from Zeus. I finally arrived to the lakes, and pitched my tent under the rain. Even eyes closed, warm and comfy in my sleeping bag, I could still see the lightning, feel the vibration, hear the tone and the increasing rain. Nighty night!
* **Day 6:** The Pétarel tarns are the most beautiful I've ever seen in France, natural, peaceful, surrounded by countless peaks. “Today's walk was quite easy, tomorrow's walk gonna be epic!” I walked around the Pétarel Peak, then down to the valley, washed my wet t-shirt and socks in the river, and walked up again to start the off-track section the next day. All my stuff was dry at the end of the sunny day. I camped in the national park and I was sadly surprised, [again](story:Pyrenees), how *protected* mountains can be covered of shit and mowed by domestic animals. However, I did my best not to show that in pictures but only the scarce beautiful nature.
* **Day 7:** Being off-track gives me a sense of ultimate freedom like nothing else I'd experienced so far. On the other hand, I attempted to pass an impassable saddle – Col de Parières. I wasn't sure yet if it was in my mind or for real but when I got closer, I could see for sure there were no way to go through, so I walked back and tried the other saddle, doable but tricky with rolling scree on the steep ascent. The descent was much nicer but as much doubtful with many bluffs. A vulture were flying about 20 m above my head and a herding dog was chasing it away from the sheep further down. Then the dog ran up hill toward me at a speed I could not exceed. Instead of running for my life, I talked to him in a friendly manner and I could finally caress him. He had an agressive spiked leather collar, but he was nice and I could resume my walk in peace. Next step: a navigation game. Basically, I followed sheep trails. Some sections were deadly steep but I made it, one step after another. I pitched my tent in a really scenic spot, surrounded by impassable mountain ranges, but I had to handle another herding dog, that one was less friendly. I played statues to walk around and said stupid but gentle things to calm him down.
* **Day 8:** I passed three saddles today. After the first easy one was a Patou, not for mustering but protecting sheep against wolves. The Patou wasn't listening his master next to him and considered me as a wolf. “You would've been attacked if you hadn't turned around the sheep,” said the stockman. The second saddle was a climb. It looked impassable *in my mind* but there were cairns, old blue painted markers, and quite a few footprints on scree, so I made it confidently. The third saddle was just easy peasy cool bananas. The walk down to the flat wide Chichin Valley was nice and diverse through three different stages: the top one was made of hilly rocks, grass, and streams from the surrounded peaks joining each other; the second one was mostly dried grass scattered by small waterfalls; the third and lower one was a pine forest with a diverse and surprisingly rich vegetation (compared to everything else I've seen in the park.) I pitched my tent before the storm in the middle of the last part, with a great view over a high waterfall.
* **Day 9:** I missed my 5am alarm and woke up at 7:30am. The morning walk through the wet forest was refreshing, as well as the rest of the cloudy day. The scenery on Col des Terres Blanches – all rock covered with scarce purple flowers – was *black and white* compared to the valleys on both sides. The view over the rocky mountain ranges were all shade of grey with rare snow patches. On the other hand, the bottom of the valleys are pine forests. Between pines and rocks is sheep and dogs land. Flowers and wild plants are eaten, grass is shit covered, streams are polluted, flies are everywhere, houses are built, fences are raised, some dogs attack trampers, all that in the hearth of the national park. The same problem is in the [Pyrénées](story:Pyrenees) (actually much worst with cattle.) The environment is definitely not a French priority and I feel better being a vegetarian in France. I might dramatise, and to be honest, only patches of the national park is impacted by livestock. You don't see that in my wide landscape photos but the truth is in the detail.
* **Day 10:** I was on the other end of the national park, which means the end of the trip. But I had spare time so I made a detour through Col de Chargès (off-track) and Col de la Règue (on-track), instead of only one saddle (Col des Tourettes.) Due to evening clouds, I couldn't see the Col de Chargès the day before, but I was rather confident by the look of it on my map. The clear view on top was really worth it, a kind of massive dynamic shape with many layers of slashed rock structures. The effect was even more obvious passing the Col de la Règue.

### Conclusion

This trip was equivalent to the [Pyrénées](story:Pyrenees) in terms of length and elevation per day, and environment. But I had quite a few off-track sections that made the journey more challenging. Considering the short-notice volte-face on my plan, this unprepared trip was finally interesting in a way to discover another part of the country I live in. That is one positive impact of Covid-19: think local first. Back home I baked a raviole gratin to re-gain my weight, brewed a fresh coffee to really feel back home, and lost my nice tan while writing this story!
