# First Backcountry Ski Tour

Planning was an adventure by itself. Winter expedition gear is harder to find, heavier and more expensive than 3-season hiking gear. Whereas my summer tent is 740 g and 400 €, my winter tent is 5 kg and 1000 €. The tundra can be windy, and I wanted to cook inside. Also, my winter sleeping bag is large, so the tent had to be spatious and storm-proof. I carried 43 kg of gear in a 60 L backpack and a sledge in public transport all the way to Saariselkä. In terms of latitude, it is 206 km north of the Polar Circle, 869 km north of Hoth, the frigid planet in Star Wars.

As you can guess, it was cold. The mountaineer's scale is altitude, the hiker's scale is cumulated elevation and distance. The scale for winter expedition is temperature and wind force. Strong wind could freeze your lungs, it could blow your tent. In this area, temperature could drop to -40 °C, and I have chosen to go there during the coldest and darkest period of the year. I had to test myself properly, feel cold to my bones, feel wilderness to my heart. But I am not Alexander Supertramp. Honestly, I was scared to get cold. I kept all my layers, and – constantly moving – I was actually feeling warm. Sweating in my mittens and down jacket, humidity froze and reduced the thermal efficiency and ease of movement. It is tricky to handle things with mittens, especially frozen mittens. Call this a stupid mistake, but I call this experience: learning from mistakes. This was my very first backcountry experience far north. To reduce the risks, I started in a tourist town. The first night in my tent was next to a hut, streetlights, and cross-country tracks. Being increasingly crazy is healthy.

I met a few people along the tracks, Andrew is a Scandinavian skier who told me not to cross rivers. It was early winter, a period when the Sun does not rise, when streams have not completely frozen. At first, he didn't believe my intentions of adventuring myself for nine long nights, then he gave me a map highlighting snow mobile tracks. Combining topographic maps with thematic maps helps to make better decisions. Then I engaged myself into unmarked ski trails. It was the new moon period, less light to better spot auroras; But I did not. They are like kiwi birds, very shy but printed and advertised everywhere. Aurora hunter in Lapland? Kiwi hunter in New Zealand? Be prepared to be disappointed. However, I spotted more wildlife in this winter trip than during [my last summer trip in Lapland](story:Ruskadventure), reindeer, white birds, black birds, a willow grouse ptarmigan. At some point, I said to myself, why so many ups and downs in this flat country? So I intentionally left track in favour of the flat river bed. Retrospectively, I regret. Wind can transform powder into solid snow, but I was in the valley, in the forest. The deep powdery snow made it hard to progress. The river was partially frozen, fallen trees forced me zigzagging. On the other hand, navigation was simple with torch on, I could see trees on one side and nothing on the other side. Indeed, a river has no reflection. That was how I kept a bearing without wasting the battery of my GPS quickly discharging by the cold. Based on the closest weather station, the temperature was -15 °C average, -6 max, -26 min. I was physically exhausted, but mentally okay. I did not mind skiing, camping, eating, thinking in the dark. You can only dream in the dark, right? Plus, [silence is gold](story:Whitish_Dusk). I crossed a few rivers, and fell into one. I broke the ice and fell my skis and legs into the water, but I managed to quickly get myself out. Is it another stupid mistake? No, it was all about gaining experience. The last part of the trip was along snow mobile tracks, easy to navigate, less demanding.

The hardest part of the day was breakfast, when compressing my sleeping bag and mattress, pumping fuel, boiling enough snow for drinking all day, packing my tent. Those tasks are harder below -20 °C. Everything freezes at those temperatures: locked thermos neck, rock-solid energy bars, rigid clothes, blue hands, shoes stuck on ski binding. It was the coldest morning when I saw the sky on fire, shades of reds and oranges on the horizon, yet freezing at sea level. As you can see from the photos, I enjoyed the first moon and the first sun rise of the year, but tips and tricks learnt in the field are more valuable. At the end of my tour, I came back to the Saariselkä ski resort and managed to go 22 km/h downhill with my sledge behind! The northern wilderness is no more unknown to me, but I still have a lot to learn, discover, and share.
