# Hump Ridge

I met a kayaker in Freshwater Hut (Stewart Island / Rakiura) who advised me to go to Orepuki Beach Cafe on my way to Tuatapere (aka Tui). I enjoyed the best meal I had in a restaurant. It was a Farm to Table Feast, based on a fresh salad, homemade bread, local lamb. Then I had a nice Flat White with a berry tart to pump my mood up before the Hump ridge. Next day, I had a Flat White in Last Light Lodge in Tui. I could not find any Topo50 maps in town and hitched to Lake Hauroko, I had my GPS anyway. I met Greg Wilson on my way to the lake, he is the writer of [Fiordland Unexplored](https://www.fiordlandunexplored.com/).

From the lake front, I walked to the lookout (located north-west of the parking lot) and Teal Bay Hut. Then I went steeply up to the Hump ridge, rewarded by a stunning panorama of the lake and beyond. Some boulders along the ridge reminded me Castle Hill (Arthur’s Pass) and Devil’s Marble (Australian Outback). The view was great on my way to the Okaka Lodge. I could see the sea, the lakes – Hauroko and Poteriteri –, the mountains – Comeron, Princess, Kaherekoau –, and Stewart Island / Rakiura at last! Even if walking on ridges make navigation easier, I did well to look at the satellite view and the Topo50 map together to optimize my route beforehand. The other side of the coin when it comes to walk on a ridge is the several ups and downs and the exposure to the elements. Fortunately, I had great weather and enough wind to keep sandflies away. The squally weather next day was rough but the Great Walk-grade track was super easy compared to the last days.

Huts of the North Island look nicer, prettier, charmer, but Port Craig School Hut is an exception. The old-fashioned NZ architecture is lovely and the red and white painting made the hut quite unique. It has a mini museum above the fireplace, maps, [Antics](https://www.outc.org.nz/antics-library) and magazines on the table, board and card games, a furnished kitchen, etc.

The widespread rain continued until the end of the track which went through a wonderful beech forest, a rocky beach and a gravel road. I could now see snow on the ridge. I was lucky not to be there anymore!

I surprised myself being so talkative with the lady who picked me up. That is actually understandable after five days without seeing a human being. She dropped me off at the Orepuki Beach Cafe.
