# Hiking Sarek

I used to live in the alps, but I am now living in Finland and I miss the mountains. Where to go then? Where could I go by public transport without airplane to avoid wasting a considerable amount of CO2 emission? Where could I go hiking for two weeks in untouched wilderness? Therefore, I headed to Sarek and nearby national parks in Sweden (Abisko and Stora Sjöfallet). It is two days far from Finland by ferry and train. I spent a few days planning with topographic maps and a guide book. Because it was an autonomous trip, meaning I carry all I need (including food, gas, and tent) in my backpack, I prepared and cooked 18 days of [compact and nutritionally balanced meals and snacks](https://fediverse.blog/~/ExploreWilder/Backcountry%20Cooking). About weight, I had 7 kg of food, 14 kg of gear including 2 kg of camera gear, 21 kg total plus water.

It was easy stepping into the forest straight from the Abisko train station. Weather was still warm and mosquitoes were not so aggressive at that time of the year. My intention was to hike the Sarek mountains accessible from Abisko through the Kunglseden track. So I spent the first days along the popular track, went off-track in Sarek, and back to the Kungsleden. The vegetation is similar to Finland but wildlife is a bit different. I spotted birds I've never seen, never so close to me: the willow ptarmigan, the gull-billed tern, the sandpiper. The track was well-marked, bridges and duckboards helped a lot, actually too much. It was easy going, one step at a time, without surprise. Whereas it was mostly cloudy, with sun spells scattered by rain, evenings where sometimes surprising with short heavy rain and wind challenging my 913 g tent pitched in the exposed tundra. Such weather, the rainbow season, is great for photography.

After three days on the Kunglseden, I turned west toward Norway, through the Nordkalottleden track, on the flat valley covered of tiny colourful flowers, scattered by small lakes. High peaks were often under the clouds. Rocks were also diverse in colours and shapes. I witnessed one more time the nature paradox: the most beautiful areas are the less popular ones. Very few hikers despite the pretty scenery and relative easy terrain. I arrived to Ritsem after a couple of days and took a small ferry to Anonjámme. Getting closer to Sarek, I could feel the remoteness, fewer bridges, more river crossings, narrower tracks, more off-track navigation. It was getting more interesting and challenging.

Sarek is made of large valleys and sharp peaks. For the challenge and the view, I climbed some summits. It was a sunny morning when I left most of my gear in my tent to climb the first one: Svarta Spetsen. When it comes to hiking many days, you have to find time to dry your sleeping equipment and reduce moisture, and summits are great opportunities. Svarta Spetsen looks very airy from the valley, Skárjá, and I would not think about climbing this summit, especially during my first visit, but the guide book mentioned it. It was not climbing but scrambling, easier than it looked. Dare to try and you will be rewarded. I did not have such a good weather for the next summits. I reached Axel Hambergs in the fog. I had a snack break on top, waiting for the fog to go away. I had few windows to take photos, the sky started to clear once I went back to my tent in the valley.

Alggavágge was relaxing until the swamp near the river and bush-bashing in the small forest. I pitched my tent just before the heavy rain, wind, and lightnings (3 seconds far away). Anyway, I was lucky and dry, except my socks and shoes. My tent was shaking, but I managed to sleep well though I regretted to have left the guy lines home to save weight. I continued toward Nåite Noajdde, another easy summit. More river crossings, more surprising weather changing very quickly, from sunny to stormy, from heavy clouds to perfect weather in few hours. It is source of photography opportunities, essential for me. Indeed, photography, nature, and hiking are bound together. But that day, I reached the top of Nåite Noajdde in the fog and could not see anything. The hardest part of the trip, or should I say the most interesting one, was the saddle on my way to Skájdejågåsj, steep scramble up on wet rocks, and even steeper climb down. I could have chosen an easier alternative, but I needed a proper challenge to make me feel alive. My sensitive and reddish feet hurt, probably due to the distance I walked every day (25 km on average) and the loose rocky terrain and socks often wet by river crossings. On the other hand, I picked up blueberries almost every day for my porridge, and I found an impressive patch of cloudberries. I also spotted many reindeer peacefully grazing the tundra. I haven't met anyone for the last days.

Back to the easy-going and well-marked Kunglseden, my backpack was lighter with less food. I passed a few hikers, coming from all over the world, with huge backpacks over 28 kg. There is no fun to carry such a heavy load. I had blue sky for the last 3 days to Jäkkvik. The last part was between flat open hills and birch and pine forests. It ended with a short and relaxing rowing boat crossing. After days in nature, I was feeling better connected without the Internet, safer in wilderness than society, more amazed by birds fighting the elements than technology improvements. The excitement at the start was as good as the achievement at the end. I hitchhike from the road-end to Lycksele with Jessica and Laetitia driving back from the Lofoten islands all the way to Belgium. They dropped me off in Lycksele and I discovered a stylish, very good coffee roastery: Budhas Kafferostery. I continued by bus to Umeå and caught the ferry to Finland.
