# Hostile Heaven

Every winter, my goal is to venture further north. I fell in love with the peacefulness of winter since my [first snowshoe hike](story:Whitish_Dusk). This time, I aimed to explore the northernmost and most remote area in mainland Europe: the Varangerhalvøya National Park in Norway. That place is so touristic... that I was unable to find any guidebooks or advice on how to cross the area in winter. It appears that Svalbard and Greenland are more popular destinations for the Arctic addicts. That is why I found Varanger interesting: it is untouched and challenging. As Dara McAnulty writes in *Diary of a Young Naturalist*, “Our exposure to wildlife and wild places has been robbed by modernity and ‘progress’. Our pathways for exploration have been severed by development and roads and pollution.”

Flying is a quick but environmentally unfriendly way to get there. Taking the bus is not practical when carrying a sled and over forty kilograms of expedition gear, as it takes several days with many stops. To make the trip more enjoyable and spend quality time together, my friend and I decided to rent a car. During our journey, we camped in -31°C, witnessed stunning auroras, and discovered the smoked sauna in Kiilopää. We also had ski and snowshoe day hikes, sampled local cuisine and coffee shops, and learned about the Kven ethnic group by visiting the Vadsø museum. Although the smoked sauna hurt my eyes, the breathtaking view and invigorating frozen bath made it an unforgettable experience. Learning about the local history and culture through activities in nearby towns before the actual expedition was valuable in appreciating the area from a broader perspective, mixing the social and cultural heritage with the outdoor trip for a complete experience. Upon arriving in Vardø, my friend drove back home and I began skiing. It is really possible to travel by bus, as I did when returning home after the trip, from Tana Bru (also known as Deanušaldi in Northern Sámi) back to Finland. In the past, the Kven people used skis for transportation before the advent of roads. Therefore, relatively speaking, travelling by bus is a confortable option, and travelling by ski sounds reasonable.

The coastal area presents a stark contrast to the Varanger hills further inland. The Arctic sea smoke created a misty appearance over the sea. The wildlife was surprisingly vibrant along the coast with seals, foxes, white rabbits, and various birds attracting many other nature lovers. However, upon reaching Vardø, I headed straight into the hills where the predominant scenery was various shades of white, attracting nobody but disoriented explorers.

On the first and second evening, I was fortunate enough to witness the bloody reddish sunset, highlighting the shape of the bushless tundra. The minimalist scenery of Varanger reflects a simple way of life, with a crystal clear and natural purpose. The landscape is mostly flat, but I could feel the elevation in my legs as I pulled the 40kg sled across the never-ending land, heading towards the horizon each day. Despite the layer of solid snow, I was moving more slowly than last winter. However, I managed my layers of clothing better to stay warm and avoid sweating. Sweat reduces insulation, making clothing less effective and increasing the risk of feeling cold later on. So I had a summer merino/possum hat and a synthetic ushanka, a fleece jacket and a down jacket, thin socks, thicker socks, summer gloves, lightweight mittens and multi-layer mittens in my small backpack, easy access because the wind could stop and start suddenly.

The weather for the following days was similar: foggy and windy. Although the wind was my worst enemy, it was also my best friend. In low visibility, the wind blowing constantly in the same direction (against me) helped me keep my bearing. I attached a piece of dark plastic to my trekking poles. To view my itinerary, I referred to my paper map, while I used the handheld GPS to determine my location. To maintain the same bearing while moving slowly, I relied on my compass and the angle between myself and the piece of plastic. On average, I covered fewer kilometers per day compared to [my previous winter trip](story:Winter_Immersion_in_Lapland). The difference in latitude between Vardø and Inari is less than two degrees, but it is one less hour of light in Vardø. Light means daylight or civil twilight. Nautical and astronomical twilight are too dark without a headlight.

I really like my tent, but staying in a hut is often more comfy and save time on pitching and packing. Unfortunately, the 4-bunk Stormheim/Huhttirčohkat hut was in such bad shape that staying in the tent would have been a better option. After clearing the entrance and window of snow, I opened the door and found dead worms, mess, dust, and rubbish everywhere including in the fireplace. Not everybody knows that it is toxic and wrong to burn plastic that way. There was fishing gear on one side, rifle ammunition, bottles of alcohol on the other side, next to a rusted gas stove. I started a fire and spread out my gear to dry. After a few minutes, I heard droplets and realized that the ceiling, covered in frost, had started to melt onto my stuff. So, I put everything under a plastic cover, and finally enjoyed dinner in the warm shelter.

I had thick fog for days. I could not see farther away than my skis. Sometimes, I could not distinguish the sky from the snow. In such situation, I navigate with the wind. When the wind stops, what is left is the magnetic north. But regularly checking my compass is not so accurate compared to using a distinguishable landmark on the horizon such as a mountain peak, a patch of trees, or just a rock on the snow. The challenge in poor visibility is to sidle through the bluffy streams. There are many ups and downs too small to be on topographic maps, but big enough to impede progress.

The Hube-hytta hut downhill was locked, so I rushed uphill to reach the 4-bunk Bjørnkardhytta hut and arrived after sunset. The Moon and Venus were visible and helped me keep my bearing. This hut is in a good shape and very well maintained. It is also bigger than Stormheim/Huhttirčohkat, so you won't hit your head when you wake up. According to the logbook, this hut hasn't been visited since the ninth of October. I noticed the same in the other huts, nobody is going there between November and February. I haven't seen anyone in my entire trip.

Wildlife was rather scarce too. However, when I spotted Rock Ptarmingans, I paused to appreciate the moment of vibrant nature, looking humble at those birds surviving in such a hostile environment. Then I retrieved my camera from my sled and my warm battery from my pocket. Usually, these birds fly at first sight, but luckily not this time, and I managed to capture some photos. A few minutes later, I spotted some reindeer on the snow-covered river. The small bush is a source of life. I did not stay long down in the valley due to the risk of unfrozen streams and weak snow bridges. Based on my last winter experience, narrow streams are particularly risky, difficult to climb. So I generally preferred to ascend and stay at higher elevations. But higher means more exposed, and the wind became challenging. I passed the locked Ragnarok hut and ended my day in the 4-bunk Heimdal hut, which had last been visited at the end of September. The candle copper holder and the red and white checkered kitchen towel in front of the window added a charming touch, making me feel warm and comfy in the middle of nowhere. Staying in the hut is free of charge. The price is the energy required to reach it. The wind was so strong that even standing and breathing were challenging. I deemed it unsafe to continue and stayed one more day in the hut. During that day, there was a near gale-force wind with a wind chill of approximately -27°C and gust reaching 21.3 m/s. To get an idea of how it feels, imagine driving at 76 km/h, sticking your head out of the window, and attempting to breathe and see. The weather data are from the stations located outside the huts or in towns, and the source is The Norwegian Meteorological Institute (MET Norway).

I was feeling in quarantine, but patience is good to have for such remote trip, and it is something I learnt by hitchhiking. At this speed I would run out of food before reaching town. Luckily, I found instant food bags even though half of them were expired. I was outside cellular network, but this time I had a 2-way satellite communication, giving peace of mind to my loved ones. They could track my location using a web map thanks to my device sending it on a regular basis. They know I am fine in my tent thanks to my daily messages received as emails and text messages. However, if I am not moving on the map, if one message fails to be sent, then it is raising worries and stress even though I am perfectly fine. What does it really mean to my friend when I am stopping earlier than usual? What “everything is okay” means if I am not moving the whole day and the weather forecast is terrible? Could it be a satellite or device malfunction? Under emotional stress, we may imagine the worst. However, my device provides acknowledgement on transmitted data sent over the Iridium network, which covers the Arctic region quite well, in contrast to the Globalstar satellite constellation.

I felt free to roam anywhere in this land and think whatever I wanted, but I was limited by my body, my gear and food supply. Mother Nature could decide my fate whenever she wanted. However, having the opportunity to appreciate nature in its wildest form is a gift that is not often bestowed, especially in Varanger. The face mask helped me breathe against the strong wind, but it, together with my goggles, reduced visibility due to condensation. Falling snow hit my eyes if not covered with goggles. There was nothing to see anyway as the fog was too thick. As an enthusiastic photographer, this was a disappointment, but as an outdoor enthusiast, I was still happy feeling the immensity and remoteness. I left the shelter and moved forward. Weather forecast was unfavourable. The wind chill was not better, the average wind was 16 m/s with gust at 23.2 m/s, still near gale conditions, but I was not patient enough to stay stuck one more day. That was anyway normal conditions. Throughout my trip, the wind chill was very cold for a third of the time, meaning between -25 and -35°C. Below -35°C dramatically increase the danger of frostbite.

The wind was pushing me, the snow was slippery even though my fish-scaled skis are designed to prevent backward movements. There are no crevasses here but snow bridges and steep ups and downs easy to fall into in poor visibility. The weather could only get better. When the sky started to clear, it was a unique experience, akin to flying in an airplane. The snow and fog resembled clouds, and the rocks appeared as mountain peaks. I felt like I was flying, independently and eco-friendly. The weather improved, revealing the sun, snow shades, small hills, a hint of vegetation, and even some birds. Contemporary artists would be amazed by Mother Nature's art, painting with a brush of wind, and colours of snow shades, all sorts of intricate patterns on the ground. The blue sky did not last the afternoon. Pitching the tent alone against the wind was first challenging, but I eventually got used to it.

I felt fine, warm and moving a bit everyday along my planned route. I wasn't inspired to photograph the scenery and the weather was not pushing me to play with my camera. But that is okay because I found opportunities to capture the beautiful nature anyway. I managed to experiment new things such as fast shutter speed to capture the falling snowflakes. By the way, I was feeling warm, but I was not really. I realised that something was wrong when I saw my nose through the small mirror of my thermos. I was not sure how bad it was, good enough to continue, bad enough to consider stopping in the next town. It was partially white, partially brownish, slightly hurting, smelling cheesy. It got bigger for the next three windy and cold days.

The last bit was completely different from the rest, through deep snow in a birch forest and partially covered streams. Trees are sparse and don't grow much above a couple of hundred meters above sea level due to the rough environment and climate. That is welcoming neither wildlife, nor humans staying either along the coast or further south. I haven't seen any human footprints in the national park other than some shelters. No track, no power line, no GSM antenna, no footprint, nobody else than me. That is exactly what I was looking for reconnecting with the essential.

In the Tana Bru town, I went to a pizzeria and the guy noticed my nose, said it would get worst and turn purple. He advised me to stop, and offered me a sample of cream for frozen skin on side of my tasty pizza. My crazy side pushed me to continue but this time I followed my wisdom and caught the bus home. I was lucky to get a cheap room in the Tana Bru hostel, but less lucky in Rovaniemi. Staying in a touristic city during the peak season without booking was more challenging to me than camping in the tundra. After visiting half a dozen fully booked hotels, I found one, which was twice more expensive than Tana Bru. Finally back home, I experienced the usual social pattern: going into wilderness worries my friends, coming back is conforting them, sharing my point of views is delighting them. This trip was not harder than my previous winter expeditions, but those were necessary to accomplish this one. Both planning and experience were required. If you want to do otherwise, joining a guided tour may be a good solution. I've never done that though. I've always been on my own.
