# Sailing The Pacific Ocean

I was hitching from Te Anau to Dunedin via Invercagill to the Spherical Boulders. I was dropped off at a good hitching spot. A car stopped, a couple in their forties: Seff and William. They hitched from Motueka (north of the South Island) to Dunedin because William had a job interview and decided to drive back to Motueka in a rented car. They had no house but a boat and had spent the last weeks sailing around New Zealand from the Bay of Islands. We talked for a few minutes and I did not know much about them when William gave me the opportunity to be part of their adventure. I was so happy with a big smile on my face.

We arrived in Nelson in the evening and stopped in Christchurch to buy food for a few days, mainly fruit and veggies. Seff made it clear to me that I could take anything I wanted. I chose nothing as I wanted to have their authentic life. Then we went straight to Nelson via the Lewis Pass with a stop for petrol and a pie. We spent the night in the living room of Paul, a friend of William's.

Seff, William, Paul and I went to Motueka to load the boat with the food and started our awestruck journey. First and foremost, William taught me the safety rules and where the important stuff were: the life jacket, the radio and channel 16, the fire extinguisher, the gas bottles, and finally the toilets. Secondly, I learnt how to use the tiller – the engine started and the sails went up. The boat named “Dulci-Bella”, which means “sweet beauty”, is 12 metres long and 3.5m wide. Professionally built in Auckland between 1993 and 1995, she has a steel hull with marine ply decks. We headed for the French Pass, steering the boat according to William's instructions, the compass and the depth gauge (which should not indicate a depth below 1m.) **I realised that all this was more a feeling than a science kind of way to drive that boat, and I loved it. “Keep one hand for the boat and one for yourself” William insisted. “Be one with the boat and the environment, the waves, the wind, the shore” he said profoundly as a god's rule, with passion and love.**

Arriving through the French Pass, the crew was overwhelmed with concentration and seriousness. Passing at high tide to avoid hitting rocks, the depth sensor went crazy: 1m, 51m and even 100m with 0.7m in between. “.7! Is that OK?” I asked, “what the heck is going on?” I thought, admiring the complete confidence on William's face. As we passed, the waves got bigger and I felt sick and vomited.

I learnt the basics of sailing and discovered the coast like never before. In the evening, the sun was on one side and the moon on the other side, so beautiful. Last but not least, I learnt how to fish (how to kill and gut a fish.) **I really enjoyed killing the fish I got** – five fish but three were not big enough to keep on board. **It is good for my soul to know what I eat, coming out of the water to fill a stomach. Compared to supermarket food, loaded with chemicals to keep it looking good through the whole ethically dubious process from the farm to the package.** I was not seasick thanks to good weather conditions.

The morning waves were gentle, but the evening was crazy, it was hard to keep the boat going in one direction, I was using all my weight. We recorded the highest speed William has ever done with Dulci-Bella – 9.1 knots. Unfortunately, Seff was seasick in bed. She felt better inside whereas I felt much better outside. I got wet and cold a few times (despite the waterproof gear), tired and unsure, I watched them from times to times with a scared face. Sailing the Pacific ocean in a pretty small boat is exciting, but scary when the weather and waves are threatening. The ocean calmed down and dolphins swam next to the boat.

The next day, a seal waved to us. We went ashore to drop off Paul, who had to get back to work. This fishing day was less successful and two pots were broken by the waves of a larger motorboat. Like most mornings with the crew, I got porridge – oats, dried apricots, dried figs, grapes, nuts, milk, cinnamon. William asked me to follow a cap, so I mainly used the compass – “between 210 and 240 degrees” – but instead we drifted slowly towards the shore. He repeated to follow his direction, but I drifted slightly anyway, as I was a bit scared of going nowhere in the ocean. As usual, Seff cooked for us, then they slept. At this time, I was the only one awake, steering the boat in the placid Pacific. Wales jets and jumps, lots of dolphins and seals dancing between water and air. Albatrosses were part of the show. The most beautiful cloud formation was just in time for sunset. Behind me was a massive rainbow. I had never imagined heaven with such a breathtaking scenery. Then sky turned to blood and hell came. Huge waves and strong winds made navigation much difficult. William woke up and gave new directions, explaining how to deal with the waves against us and how to keep the wind on the sails to avoid vibrations. The tools used for night navigation are different, lighthouses are used instead of the compass. As we approached the shore, William commanded me to “follow that light” and after a while we agreed each other that the light was not blinking but inching. “I think we are following a boat...” I was overwhelmed with fear more than ever, but we made did.

I used to gaze at the horizon every morning, not to enjoy the view, but to feel better. I was surprised that this trick did not work from inside, looking through the window. The wind was not with us, and we sailed as slow as 2-3 knots to Oamaru. I was still wet from the last night and I missed a long hot shower to wash off the salt. Fortunately, Seff shared her happiness not only with her kindness and her weatherproof smile, but also by cooking varied meals like cheese toast with salad of veggies and feta, porridge, potatoes, rice, omelet, etc. as often as William wanted... more than three times a day – “days are long and the boat moves your stomach.” Seff did not feel confident sailing for several days, worried, sick, tired, but her soul was strong enough to bide as young as 20 years old. **She said “we do not grow old in our soul” with her eyes sparkled with merriment.**

In Oamaru, the boat did not move, so we slept for hours and I read for the first time the Genesis from the Holy Bible I found on the shelf next to my bunk. Seff cooked porridge, omelet, coffee and crêpes (with honey, butter and lemon). William and I went ashore for diesel – NZ$.93 instead of NZ$.5 a litre in the commercial port of Motueka, public price is not fair. I had a weird feeling by flouncing the earth, as if it was moving, as if my brain got used to the motion of the boat. We carried three tanks from town to harbour. William ran with a kind smile and a sneaky laugh. We came back into town with Seff to visit the old town, with its old-fashioned shops and owners. We all wanted a pizza and stopped at the first pizzeria we found. We stayed in Oamaru for the day due to the bad weather – something we are more sensible than on a road trip.

The next day we started the engine after lunch. I watched the thunder of the sea on the rocks, under the rain and heavy clouds, and thought of leaving the boat right now, but I heard many times – since the beginning of my travel – how brave I am, enough to believe that I really am. **Plus I could not shorten my dream no matter how hard it was, I would take part of the crew up to Dunedin, sailing together days and nights.** Moreover, the human aspect of such an experience is meaningful because of the environment: together in close quarters, with cobbers I did not know before, for a few tiring and stressful days. I observed William survey the sea, thinking about how to deal with it. I trusted him completely. If he thought we could make it, we would, and we did. We entered Otago Harbour, passed the lighthouse and the albatross colony and anchored off the channel. Our journey was finished, we had covered 450 nautical miles (833km). For the first time, Seff and William made a prier.

For the next and final day of sailing we continued on the wharf where Seff and William would be staying for a while. We were on a marine road, following the red and green markings that led us through the Otago Harbour. We enjoyed being alone, zigzagging to keep the wind in the sails. Finally, we arrived, had a shower, and cleaned my salty clothes. We had a fish & ships and said goodbye. Then I just trod to the exact same spot from where they had picked me up days before, hoping to be lucky enough to meet guys as friendly, happy, crazy, adventurous as Seff and William, who will stay in my heart forever.
