# Lake Monowai

Waiting in the cafe for a better weather, the lady at the counter said that she likes such stormy weather, “it makes me feel happy to have a warm place, there is no place like home!” An other lady said it’s “not a good time for tramping, hey! – Well, I’ll stay in my tent in Gumstone Beach. – Oh! You’re welcome to stay in my place, I have a spare bed.”

Her place is just two minutes drive from the cafe – in the middle of nowhere – a typical backcountry NZ house. Penny lives with her husband Brian and hosted a wwoofer helping gardening. I could finally dry my clothes thanks to the fireplace. I spent a while moving frames straight whereas Penny cooked tea. Dinner conversation were focused on tramping, UFO and the difference of lifestyle between countries. After a dreamy night, I woke up at 8am, got Marmite on toasts and coffee, said goodbye, and headed a bit worried to Lake Monowai. Snowy tops are good looking but not friendly for trampers without crampons and ice-axe. Anyway, it wasn’t a big deal since the Rodger Inlet tops are just a day walk to the carpark, no much engagement.

Some sections from the carpark to Rodger Inlet Hut are muddy or swampy, and others are tricky to navigate through due to fallen trees and detours, but markers were helpful.

I set the alarm at 6am and started walking before 8am after a big breaky, extra milk, extra muesli, extra chocolate, large coffee, all that in front of the Rodger Inlet Hut with the raising fog making quite a mystic scenery. The walk up to the bush line was clean and well marked for a route-grade track. I lost track twice but found my way out pretty fast, nothing wrong, just shortcuts! Then I walked up to the Rodger Inlet top – 1,316 m – and continued NWN along the ridge up to the saddle pt 1170. I had a blue sky and a stunning view on both side of the lake Monowai and surrounding tops. Snow wasn’t that deep, visible above 930 m and about 20 cm at 1,300 m. I watched all my steps, too scared to fell the ridge or drown myself in the peaceful icy tarn. My first plan was to stay on the ridge up to 100 m SES of pt 1453 but it looked too snowy so I headed to Rough Point by following a stream. Then started the roughest section: steep bush bashing. A 10 m waterfall forced me to leave the stream and fight trees instead. One of them torn my rain-proof backpack cover. Steepness and dense vegetation made navigation tricky. It was end afternoon when I could finally find a two square metre flat area to pitch my tent, I wasn’t sure I could reach the next hut 2 km far before sunset. It was a great decision since I spent the whole morning to make it.

Arrived in the warm Monowai Hut, three fishermen welcomed me with a large piece of steak, butter on bread and fried shellfish with onion, all freshly cooked with the fireplace. I skipped breakfast and I was hungry, I was wet by the poor rain but I warmed myself up pretty fast and my super smiley face made the fishermen happy. They were going to a fishing competition and one of them shook my hand twice, the first time because I carry a PLB, and the second because I successfully walked from Rodger Inlet Hut through the ridge. They left the hut early afternoon, running out of beer. I’ve chosen to stay there since Clark Hut – the next hut – is a basic A-frame hut and weather hadn’t decided to improve. So I spent time cleaning the hut and writing notes.

I set the alarm at 5:30am and had a big breaky. Darkness and candle light made me feel lonely and remote, not a bad feeling sometimes. It rained all night and day so the track was swampy and muddy most of the 9h walk to Green Lake Hut. The track was easy to follow but crossing the outstream of Island Lake was tricky and risky. The view was covered by mist and I could not see beyond the small island, mysterious by itself. Ruru, Kākā and other birds I’ve never seen might have had a fancy party and karaoke, who knows?! Then I walked along Green Lake, a common name for a NZ lake but my feeling was special. It’s a mirroring and quiet lake, mist floating through the valley, a couple of scaulp ducks turning around and breaking the symmetry, crystal clear water, white mountain at the horizon and orange clouds at sunset. What a beauty! The loop ended the next day, back to the Monowai carpark through a nice beech forest.
