# Spitsbergen Ski Tour

## Introduction

The archipelago was first discovered by an expedition led by Willem Barentsz in 1596 while he was searching for the Northeast Passage. During the expedition, he named the largest island Spitsbergen, which means “pointed mountains” in Dutch, after the mountains on the western side of the island. The archipelago has a rather dark history involving whaling, hunting, trapping and mining, and now tourism. Svalbard consists of nine main islands. The largest town, Longyearbyen, is named after the American mining pioneer John Munroe Longyear. Despite being *just* 1,316 km from the North Pole, Longyearbyen is much warmer than you might expect.

Everyone visiting Svalbard have to pay an environmental tax of NOK 150. This tax is automatically added to the ticket prices by airlines and cruise companies. Revenues generated by this tax go to the Svalbard Environmental Protection Fund, which also receives revenue from fishing and hunting fees. The fund aims to protect the Svalbard's natural environment. This tax does not deter tourists. In fact, tourism has increased since this tax was introduced in 2007. The fund is growing, as are the challenges. Countless reports conclude that the climate crisis is caused by human climate gas emissions. It is estimated that Svalbard will have lost 50% of its glacier mass by 2100. The loss of snow and ice in the Arctic affects not only the local climate but can also contribute to extreme weather worldwide. Meanwhile, the large amount of climate gases stored in the ground of Svalbard (permafrost) are being released into the atmosphere at an increasing rate as the glaciers retreat and the permafrost temperature gradients are rising. The release of these climate gases from Svalbard increases the effects of climate change and increases global warming.

According to the Circumpolar Action Plan, tourism has a low impact on polar bears, whereas the human-caused climate crisis has a high impact. However, the tourism industry contributes to the climate crisis. Polar bears are considered marine mammals as they spend most of their lives on drifting sea ice. They are the largest land predators on Earth. An adult male can weigh up to 700 kg and stand 260 cm tall. They could be on top of the food chain. Yet, they have the vulnerable status on the {IUCN}="International Union for Conservation of Nature" Red List of Threatened Species, meaning endangered and protected by law. There are around 2,644 polar bears in the Svalbard archipelago and Barents Sea, which is slightly more than the human population of around 2,459 in Svalbard. However, only around 350 polar bears live in Spitsbergen, with most of the population residing in Longyearbyen.

Svalbard is a great place to learn about many things that would be risky to do alone without prior guidance, such as glaciers, weak ice and polar bears. Although I have always been skeptical about guided expeditions and have already completed several winter expeditions in the Arctic on my own, this time I wanted to learn from others. On this trip, I learnt lots of useful tips and tricks from a local guide who has lived in the region all his life. I also enjoyed spending time with the other two guests.

We met the day before we put on our skis. We had a short briefing meeting to introduce ourselves and the plan. There were five of us in the team: the guide, Simon, with his dog, Gorilla; and three guests: Slawa, Oliver and myself. The plan was to leave civilisation behind on snowmobiles and start skiing from Lomonosovfonna to reach the highest summit in Svalbard: Newtontoppen (1,713 m). We would then continue high up on the glacier, above the 79th parallel, before descending to the frozen sea at Billefjorden, where we would catch a boat. After the meeting, we spent the rest of the day preparing our equipment and food. On my own winter trips, I eat warm porridge in the morning, two snacks during the day and a warm dinner. This provides enough energy to keep moving. On this trip, however, I followed the guide's lead, eating one warm porridge, one warm lunch and one warm dinner, as well as many small snacks throughout the day. I would carry on this 11-day trip much more than I carried on [my own 12-day trip](story:Winter_Immersion_in_Lapland). No worries, I like food, especially in the middle of nowhere.

## Expedition

*Day 1:* We put Gorilla in his wooden box, and loaded our pulkas onto a large trailer. Two snowmobile drivers joined us, we would go together and they would drive the snowmobiles back to town. We had a few photo and toilet breaks on our way. I did not feel anything, but Simon noticed my white nose. Fortunately, we cared about each other and I could warm it up. Once far enough from the city, we unloaded the pulkas, loaded one snowmobile onto the trailer, got a warm berry juice, said goodbye to the two drivers, and continued skiing for 4 km on the Lomonosovfonna glacier.

*Day 2:* The next morning, I got frostbite on my nose again, but it's fine as long as it's warmed up quickly. [Last winter](story:Hostile_Heaven), when I was on my own, I made the mistake of not keeping an eye on my nose with a mirror. I learnt important things from the beginning: to keep an eye on my nose and to wear sunglasses to avoid snowblindness. This can be challenging in windy conditions because the nose and cheek should be covered as well. However, wearing a face mask can fog up glasses. What you wear really depends on the conditions, which were changing quickly. It went from cold to warm, windy, sunny and snowy. Despite eating plenty of food and the rather flat terrain, I was feeling tired.

*Day 3:* Alarm at 6am, because the weather forecast was nice for the morning, but strong winds in the afternoon. However, the weather suddenly changed before we left camp at 7:30am. We stayed, but moved our tunnel tents so that they were facing into the wind. Although it is annoying to empty the tents, remove the pegs and the snow covering the flaps, and pitch it again, it is good practice for windy conditions, and it is better to be safe than sorry. After moving the tent, the weather changed again, so we packed up and left. Once we were on the move, the wind was fine. It's more challenging when pitching the tent. The wind intensified in the evening, so we decided to pitch two tents instead of three. We used the poles and pegs from the third tent to secure the other two. Gorilla, Simon and I shared one tent. In such a confined space, there was no way to escape, so I had to be sociable. I'm not usually a very talkative person, but we had great conversations about all kinds of topics.

*Day 4:* We stayed longer in the tent because of the strong wind that weakened in the evening. We packed up and went through Titan Pass. The view was stunning: flat glaciers surrounded by mountains, sharp on one side, smooth on the other. We did not cover much distance, and we did not sleep for very long either. Polar bear watch was a nightly routine: one of us would stay awake for a while, watch with binoculars and a wistle to alert everybody, especially Simon, who had a rifle, a revolver, and flares. For additional defence, we had a tripwire around the camp and Gorilla, who would naturally growl and hunt any wild animal. This kind of husky used to be wild when the Russians let them to live on their own in the wilderness. I was so disappointed this night when I found my mattress had gone flat. I had the repair kit, but I could not spot the leak. Fortunately, my teammate had an extra mattress, so I did not have to investigate further using soap and water. Something [I did back home](https://lone.earth/w/cFhQLtsX388fGLjD6CMLpA). By *night*, I mean *at camp*, because it's bright daylight 24/7 at this time of the year. 

*Day 5:* Summit day! We left our tent and started skiing, continuing on foot with crampons where it became too steep. We were literally on a leash: a rope connected us all together in mountaineering mode. Our efforts were rewarded at the summit with a [360 panorama](https://lone.earth/w/v9WGFUyRZU1uGnjwoUm9Dj). The way down was much faster. When I got back to camp, I noticed that the USB connector of my *military-grade* GPS was faulty. I could not charge inside my sleeping bag. I had to keep an eye on the screen to see if it was charging and keep wiggling the cable. Bear watch was a good time for this.

*Day 6:* We traveled along a couple of glaciers — up on Kvitbreen and down on Veteranen, which is the longest glacier in Svalbard. The sun was strong. Here, the sky was darker and the snow was brighter than anywhere else I had been. Before setting up camp, Simon showed us how to use the avalanche probe to spot crevasses. My ski skins were not sticking, so I used double-sided tape to fix them during my bear watch time.

*Day 7:* It was yet another beautiful day. I did not expect such a warm temperature; I was sweaty, but I was also cold without gloves. However, my coldest gloves were too warm. Spring was on its way! The descent to sea level was scenic, with ever-changing views: from glaciers to moraines and the frozen sea. The amazing moraine had a wavy wall of clear ice with countless air bubbles, dust and rocks trapped inside, gathered like stars in a galaxy. As we followed the moraine down to the stream, we skied on partially frozen water. Essentially, the glacier water flows, freezes, flows again on top of the ice, and then freezes again. This creates thick ice under the layer of melted snow and water. We swapped our skis for crampons as the slope became steeper and more slippery. With every step, we either broke weak ice or splashed through water. As we approached the shore, we noticed wild footprints, sea birds, ptarmigans, reindeer. Svalbard is treeless, but we found driftwood, most likely from Russia.

*Day 8:* It was a pretty cold night. There was a high probability of encountering a bear compared to further up the glacier, so we did not set up the tripwire — there was always someone standing outside. We had a relaxing day exploring the area and ice fishing. I had no luck, but Simon caught five Arctic char. Lunch was fresh, warm and delicious: pan-fried fish with butter and lemon pepper. I'm a vegetarian, but if I know exactly where the fish comes from and that the whole process is ethical, then I don't mind eating fish or meat. As usual, many of our conversations were about the environment because we were all here to enjoy nature. It also felt good to talk about random topics in such an exceptional environment.

*Day 9:* We traveled across the frozen sea and spotted a few seals. We visited a two-bunk hut used by trappers and hunters, before continuing up onto the glacier. The higher up, the better, as bears tend to stay at sea level. It's all about playing with probabilities.

*Day 10:* Once again, it was a warm and sunny day. I was sweating in my winter clothes. I should have packed my summer clothes! After a steep climb pulling the pulka with crampons and reaching the top of the saddle, where we enjoyed a fantastic view, we descended quickly to reach the three-bunk Abbehytta hut, where we stayed overnight. The walls of the hut were much thicker than our tent, but the door was closed with a thin cord. The hut was not well maintained, but it was free and still standing. A kind of luxury in the Arctic.

*Day 11:* We set our alarms for 3am to make sure we were on time for the pickup. We skied on the frozen sea. Oliver led the way, while Simon provided directions with "more right" and "more left" commands. Slawa and I kept a watchful eye out for polar bears. I was surprised to get so close to the ice edge. In Finland, the ice gets thinner and thinner; it's not safe to get too close to the edge in case the ice breaks. Here, however, the ice was thick all the way to the edge. The ice was flexible enough to see it moving with the waves. There was also drifting ice and lots of birds. When the boat arrived to pick us up, we jumped from one ice patch to another until we reached it. On the way back to town, we noticed the changed landscape; there was less snow after so many warm days.

## Conclusion

This was diverse in terms of environment, ranging from the highest mountains and long glaciers to the sea and its wildlife. It was the warmest winter expedition I have ever had: according to the statistics of the Norwegian Meteorological Institute from the Narveneset weather station sensors, it was -5 ˚C on average and a minimum at -11 ˚C without strong winds.

I said there were five of us on the team, but it is not honest. I mentioned the two snowmobile drivers, but there was also the team planning the trip to ensure safer travel between crevasses. There was the team fixing gear at the end of every trip, the team available every day for sharing weather forecasts through satellite communication channels, the search and rescue team in case of emergency, the boat drivers, etc. Many in the team are multitasking and working on other trips, but it is still impressive professional work when you think about it. That is why I knew from the beginning that we would succeed. With so many experts to support you, it is hard to fail. Conversely, it is easy to have fun and learn in such conditions. There are two types of learning: from the experts or from your mistakes. Both are valuable.

The day after the expedition, I walked around Longyearbyen with a rented super-zoom lens to take more photos of the wildlife. Even though Svalbard is an arctic desert, there are plenty of wild animals including birds, foxes, reindeer, whales, seals, walruses. Walruses were once abundant in Svalbard. After centuries of commercial exploitation, they were on the verge of local extinction along with the humpback whale, the blue whale, and the Svalbard reindeer. Fortunately, they have finally been granted some kind of protection. Despite having been protected for many decades, walrus and blue whale are still listed threatened on the {IUCN}="International Union for Conservation of Nature" Red List. When nature is protected, it has great resilience. Ecosystems can recover, but the climate crisis is tough on all species, including humans.
