# Twin National Parks

I've never been so much interested in hiking and off-track navigation. I'm not keen on following roads, but I used my bike so that I can quickly reach the parks lacking public access. I bought my Finnish bike second hand. It has my age and does not have battery. A more eco-friendly alternative to e-bikes full of Lithium. It was literally a pain in the ass to bike 42 km (one-way) with a 50 L backpack, but the price to pay to visit a couple of national parks. Even though Finland is 70%+ forested, and we have the right to roam, I still prefer national parks where trees grow naturally, and fall naturally. Cultivated forest are useful but less appealing from the hiker and photographer point of views.

The first park I visited – Kauhanevan-Pohjankankaan kansallispuisto – is mainly swamp. The wooden pathway made it easy to go through, but I intentionally cut the path to venture off-track through bogs. I used the GPS to locate myself, and the compass to keep bearing. I like mechanical compass, it does not consume battery, and does not need calibration. I continued through the second, more forested, national park – Lauhanvuoren kansallispuisto – quite different in terms of vegetation, topography, and access. Days are long, and it was a good feeling being woke up by the sun. The last part of the hike – southern Kauhaneva-Pohjankangas – was more demanding, with a stream crossing – where I [played the clown](story:Dusky_Track) to cross it on fallen tree trunks – and deeper swamps that looked and fell like [Pulju](story:Ruskadventure) or [Rakiura](story:Stewart_Island_Rakiura). Even though I didn't eat for three days, I was okay and faster than expected. I actually found a few berries – vaccinium oxycoccos –, probably defrozen from last year. They were acidic and tasty, but hard to pick up in bogs. I got wet with water from the swamp, and from the {patchy rain}="Irregular in quality, occurrence, intensity".

This circuit is similar to my summer plan – mixing walks along the road, on track, and off-track – but much shorter and less engaging. It was a training for map reading and time estimation as well as a mental test: hike without food. I guess it wasn't long enough to actually feel the lack of food. I finished a day earlier than expected and took the last train. My bicycle was not accepted on that specific train, so I had to leave it in the station. An excuse to visit Seinäjoki and coffee shops the next weekend.
