# Pyrenees

The challenge: solo-tramping for 12 days non-stop, carrying my home-made food, and staying every night in my tent. I've chosen the Pyrenees because of the countless ups and downs through a mountain range, and because the area seems the less crowded one in France. I planned my trip using the *Rando éditions* maps. Contrary to the famous IGN maps of the French government, they include Spain and cover a wide area with enough details, so you don't have to buy many for thru-hiking. I made up my mind with a genius combination of tracks going along the French / Spanish border, visiting the *Parc national des Pyrénées* for the French territory, and the *Parque nacional de Ordesa y Monte Perdido* for the Spanish territory. Also, I've baked some shortbreads, muesli bars, energy balls, and tasty meals based on dried mixes. That takes space and weight in my backpack. Therefore, I didn't carry my nice but heavy camera for quality pictures. I have no regret since I haven't found inspiration, neither found landscapes wild enough.

* **Day 1:** I woke up at 4:55am, took a 1h train, spent 9h in a small car, 1h30 in another train, and 30 minutes in a bus. I finally arrived at 7:30pm in Etsaut. I could have had a meal in a restaurant in the last 75-inhabitant inlet, but I could not wait any longer, I had to start hiking! I started from the Chemin de la Mâture, an easy-grade track carved on a cliff. It was dusky and I kept walking with torch on. I've spotted a couple of bats, a wild boar, and cows with patous – unfriendly dogs guarding cattle. The difficulty was more about finding a flat area to pitch my tent rather than the walk itself.
* **Day 2:** I didn't expect to see cattle in a national park. Not many flowers, not much wildlife, shit is everywhere.
* **Day 3:** The tramp to the {Embalse}="Embalse means dam/reservoir in Spanish" del Arriel Alto was pretty steep, and I was not sure if I could climb the Balaïtous with my load. Indeed, I've met mountaineers who said I would need abseiling... Therefore, I headed north, a hard down hill climb. Going up was okay but the other side of the bluffy saddle was covered of loose scree and dust – steeper than [Cascade Saddle](story:Rees_Lochnagar_Dart) with no track to follow. I made a good decision not to climb the peak, the {Brèche}="Brèche means breach in French, a narrow saddle" des Ciseaux was challenging enough! Back to the forest, I said to myself I'm more a bushman than a mountaineer.
* **Day 4:** Another sunny day. The walk from Labassa to {Ibón}="Ibón / lago means tarn / lake in Spanish" de Llena Cantal was easy peasy cool bananas. Then I climbed through the {Cuello}="Collado / cuello means pass / saddle in Spanish" de Tebarray o Piedrafita, covered of sand and loose scree, slippery even dry. The last bit at the top was my hardest climb up hill. Contrary to its name, the Cuello del Infierno (literally *Hell Saddle*) was easy game. The area is mostly rocky with grass and scrub. Not many flowers, maybe due to the elevation (≈2,000 m), warm weather, and cattle. I pitched my tent in a hidden grassy flat spot, higher than the last night for freshness. I could see the sky covered of wide high clouds and I could hear some birds and waterfalls. Just peaceful.
* **Day 5:** I walked along the southern side of Ibón Alto and reached the Collado del Letrero. It's not a busy spot probably due to the fair walk from any *hut* – I should rather say *hotel*. All huts I passed are large buildings, with solar panel, tap water, shower, food and drink for sell, crowdy in summer. Then I walked through the {Col}="Col means saddle in French" des Mulets and Col d'Araillé. There it was foggy and navigation a bit tricky. I continued toward {Lac}="Lac means lake in French" de Labas. There it was cloudy and slightly rainy. That day, I've walked about 12h and passed three saddles.
* **Day 6:** Thanks to cairns, navigation through the Col des Gentianes was okay. The Lac Glacé is a peaceful mountain lake surrounded by intimidating high peaks. The head of the Ossoue Valley has some nice waterfalls. Due to cattle, the Ossoue and the Canau Valleys smell shit. There is a nice landscape though, with rocky mountain ranges and snow. The Spanish side has a completely different vegetation, many flowers, scrubs, grasshoppers everywhere, pines down hill.
* **Day 7:** The walk through the Brèche de Roland was the most scenic section of my tramp. The Brèche is a giant open gate toward a wilder world, the *Parque nacional de Ordesa y Monte Perdido*. No hotel, no busy track, no car park, just nature. The descent from 2,800 to 1,300 m-high was diverse in vegetation as well as difficulties. From massive rocks and scree to flat grass covered of flowers dashed by bluffs. Some sections were real climb! I met a lady having a short break who asked me if I had iron-way gear for the next step... a 10 m-long iron-way. To be honest, I could have expected that if only I had known that *clavijas* (written in my map) means *iron-way* in Spanish. I said to myself “Well, it's not safe, one bad step and I go to hell, but after what I've been through I know I can do it” so did I. Then I entered the forest, tall pines, then a mix of trees similar to the [Fiordland National Park](story:Dusky_Track). Similarly to the day before, clouds appeared later the afternoon, nice white clouds, flattened by a layer of warm air at low altitude, so no rain. So far so good!
* **Day 8:** Nights were warm, so I was feeling lucky my sleeping bag had lost half its feathers. I especially enjoyed tramping through the *Parque nacional de Ordesa y Monte Perdido* with its friendly native forest – yet very quiet – and the Custodia Ridge – off-track – with its view over two canyons and big mountains. The walk to the {Cañón}="Cañón means canyon in Spanish" de Añisclo needs focus on cairns because the path is easy to loose at the first steps (stay on the true right of the stream, well above the streambed to avoid a gorge, and finally go down later on.) The last bit of the track goes quickly down to the {Río}="Río means river in Spanish" Bellós.
* **Day 9:** I had a long ascent under patchy rain and fog to the saddle – Collado de Anisclo. I found a colourful Papilio machaon caterpillar on my way. The wind shield just below the top motivated me to have coffee with super tasty home-made energy balls. A couple of griffon vulture flew around the misty peaks. They are elegant large birds. I continued down and up again to La Larri.
* **Day 10:** I went to the Lagos de la Munia. Some sections of the track were hard to find. It is clearly less used than the famous GR11. So that made the detour to the lake even more interesting. On the other hand, the walk along the gravel road up to Pic Liena was boring, with a nice view though. I found a bunch of wild raspberries and blueberries on the descent, so fresh, tasty, organic! Fresh day today, with a few clouds, and a slight drizzle end-afternoon.
* **Day 11:** I could see all the southern mountain ranges from the Port de la Barroude but fog covered most of the north – where I was heading to. The Lacs de Barroudes are the most beautiful ones I've seen during this tramp. I could not see the other side of the small misty lake dashed with mini islands. Some birds appeared and disappeared like ghosts. Mountains in the Pyrenees are similar to the [Dragon's Teeth](story:Around_Dragons_Teeth): Pretty sharp and hard to cross. It may explain why the ridge makes the French / Spanish border.
* **Day 12:** My last day was easy going and sunny. I spotted a toad early morning. I pitched my tent near Gѐdre, hitchhiked early morning to Lourdes and took the train back home.

### Afterwords

Again, tramping is my way to refocus myself on my “right motivation”. This 12-day tramp was the most physically challenging one, but actually and surprisingly not in the technical and mental point of views. Indeed, contrary to Kiwis, French prefer clean tracks so that they can run, hotel instead of basic hut. French don't like crossing rivers, so they are all bridged. Probably since I've learned tramping in New Zealand, I prefer the Kiwi way: walking on barely used tracks or just off-track, crossing rivers, getting wet and staying in basic huts, cutting wood and warming me up with the fireplace. Besides, I'm disappointed of the impact of cattle in the environment, especially in the *core zone* of a national park – {« an area of excellence in conservation management »}="Read The National Parks of France: Reference Areas, by the French government" – in France but also in Spain. Indeed, cattle eats everything including wild plants, cattle (especially cows) drops a big load of shit polluting ground and rivers at a point that I've seen blueish streams like on leaky service stations, cattle replaces native forest, cattle disturbs wild animals, uses their land. The French region's « desire to safeguard biodiversity and its commitment to ensuring sustainable development » seems misled or wrongly prioritised. I'm afraid, a wilderness area exists in the country only where men cannot harvest or make money from it. From what I've seen, economy is above ecology. But both could grow together for a sustainable future. I do miss the taste of meat but this tramping experience confirmed my new daily life as a vegetarian and I'm thinking of not eating cheese anymore – surprising for a French dude, hey!

### Acknowledgements

I would like to warmly thank Florent for his really useful feedback.
