# Around Dragons Teeth

I’ve spent a few days hitching the West Coast to the north of the island. I met all kind of friendly guys. I had a nice dinner in front of Lake Hawea with a Dutch family, visited a marae with a Māori north of Hotikita, listened to Christian and Yuletide songs for two hours with a hat seller, and I was welcomed by two locals to stay in a wooden house.

Before telling you what happened during this tramp, I have to explain why I planned to go tramping around the Dragons Teeth instead of doing the high route through the teeth. For a simple reason that I know my abilities and tramp planning requires modesty. Also, the infamous high route has less than two successful attempts a year, and numerous accounts of epics and failures. Also, the common low route is more used but bush-bashing isn’t my cup of tea. So I chose my own combination of tracks, routes, and ridges, cautiously but challenging and wise enough.

So I was back to the bush, in my tent. The sound of the rain from the inside of my tent does not have the same effect on my mood than if I were in a hut with the roaring fireplace. It’s uncomfortable. Any position hurts my back on my 5 mm-thin mattress, space and motion are limited, humidity and temperature are critical, sociability and talks are nil, but no regrets, this is adventure!

The track to Boulder Lake isn’t obvious and a farmer helped me to find my way. Weather was shit, from patchy to heavy rain, then snow and the worst I have ever had: a snowstorm right after Cow Saddle. The problem wasn’t snow by itself – only 3-4 cm-deep – but the risk of slippery (a fair drop if loosing footing), difficulty to follow the route, cold and wet clothes, gale and low visibility. Reaching the hut became a doubtful challenge. Arrived at Boulder Lake, I thought it would be a kid game to go up to its head but a few river crossings and walks in the flooded track made it hard up to the last step.

Next morning was a dream: blue sky, placid lake around slightly snowy mountain ranges, a nice waterfall with crystal clear water, and a historic hut. I started walking when sunshine reached the hut with socks and shoes almost dried thanks to the fireplace… until I crossed the Arena Creek, the swampy flat with thick and large tussock. The route to the Adelaide Tarn was pretty easy to follow, being 100% careful in a way that I looked for all cairns, flattened vegetation, unnatural things like a straight line on snow or a raised rock, a human footprint, a kind of path following the same elevation line. Some sections along the ridge were quite steep and bluffs made me think “I should rather watch my footing or I’m dead.” The tarn had waterfalls and is located next to the impressive Douglas range with its wind-shaped Dragons Teeth and Anatoki Peak. I would say that the Pinnacles in the Coromandel Peninsula are the baby of the Dragons Teeth, same shape at another degree of magnitude. The hut is located at the head of the mini lake – the tarn. It's a 9 m² hut with 4 bunks, a table, stuff to read in a shelf, two seats, four decomposing walls and a toilet next door, not a beauty and located 1,100 m-high with no fireplace, but a window with a great view!

Next day was sunny and I got UV-filtered water from the foot of the mini lake. The tramp to the Anatoki Forks was a bit harder, especially the Yuletide Peak section. You may think that I’m easily scared perhaps for good reasons but I don’t mind when I pass. I passed that scary section with bluff on both side of the ridge, a narrow steep route to negotiate carefully with good balance, footing and some basic climbing skills. The Yuletide Peak is like Yuletide songs: harsh and hard to understand. I definitively prefer the peak. Clouds grew bigger and darker with more wind, so I walked faster to cross the Anatoki river before the expected rain. By walking faster, I slipped twice in the forest and lost the well-marked track before the river. The crossing was okay with two long and strong wood sticks, flow were high but not that bad. I arrived in the Anatoki Forks Hut mid-afternoon, so I split towhai and manuka wood for the fire, during the drizzle. That hut was luxury, with water inside, hot shower, extra food and ustencils, large mattresses. Notice that having a shower is routine for the casual dude. But for a bushman as I was, it’s an event happening every three weeks, sometimes more often, sometimes less.

The walk to Waingaro Forks Hut was pleasant, warm and sunny, not much elevation but changing environment and vegetation. Drowned trees were in Lake Stanley. Indeed, There “is a slip on the north face of Mt Snowden, which tumbled down during the 1929 Murchison Earthquake and blocked the Stanley River to form Lake Stanley” (FMC Bulletin, Rebecca Hayter.)

I met the first human of my tramp, a Blue Duck / Whio conservator and a real bush woman in mini short. I asked myself if there was any reason for bush-bashing with a short, that hurts and make pretty fit legs less attractive, perhaps for a purpose.

An other warm, sunny and pleasant day in the Kahurangi National Park and I finished this tramp. I was picked up by a Māori on my way back to town. He explained to me that all words have a meaning. It is in the Māori culture to know the meaning of the words of their language, and it’s meaningful because a language is not just a communication tool but it encloses culture and history. Kahu means bird, rangi means sky, kahurangi means blue. We passed Motueka, motu means island, eka means weka (the bird). He dropped me off in Richmond, and I have no idea of the meaning of richmond! I’ve found new hiking boots in town and headed back to the bush. While walking along the road to find a good hitching spot, a lady offered me a lift, just like that, easy as. Surprisingly, she offered me to stay in her place while I was just looking for a camping spot. Lisa lives with Dave, they have a dog, three cats, one chicken and five sheep, no kids. Their house is pretty old-style – inside and outside – well maintained with a lovely garden between native forests. Lisa and I were talking like girls about everything. We had a nice vegetarian dinner – lasagna, salad, ginger beer – after a kawakawa tea which tastes gingery. Lisa and I went to the Wakefield Bakery next morning. I surprised myself again being so talkative. Lisa is a doctor, and vegetarian. Many people talk about the side effect of not eating meat, that “it is natural to eat meat.” But Lisa broke all the biased reasons to continue eating meat. She is not vegetarian for her body but the environment. We cannot keep going that way, the humankind eating so much meat. I do love meat but I was convinced to become vegetarian too. You could say that I should rather reduce the amount of meat I eat, but the less I eat the better. For example, if a fraction of the population, let’s say 1 billion eats only 200g of meat a week, then more than ten thousand tons of meat would be consumed every year. Imagine the blood bath, the square kilometres of cows, sheep, chicken and seeds requiring to feed them, the amount of water wasted, etc. What if that population became vegetarian? I do care. I don’t wait for a systemic change to act. Since the end of this travel I do not eat meat anymore and I feel as good. Thank you Lisa.
