# New Caledonia

I was in New Zealand and I had to leave the country in order to renew my visa. So I hopped on a flight to New Caledonia. I took the opportunity to visit the island. From the airport, I hithchiked north toward the long-distance hike. I met some aboriginals, the Kanaks. They were smiling and helpful, and their manners were pretty basic compared to those of the French. The island is indeed a French colony. There are 36 dialects in New Caledonia, and I was glad everyone could speak French. Contrary to [Indonesia](story:Indonesia), I did not feel lost in translation. The locals were relaxed and really friendly, open-minded, and closer to nature than metropolitans. There are loads of events centred around local food, like lychee party, avocado party, pineapple party, shrimp party, deer party. Despite being a French colony, the local culture is actually closer to the Pacific islands and Australia. Some behaviours, expressions, and livestock farming methods come from the Australian bush. It is interesting how history can shed light on the current relationship between aboriginals, the Pacific, and France. Back in 1963, France didn't sign the treaty banning nuclear weapon tests in the atmosphere, in outer space, and underwater, heavily criticised by international bodies as well as Australian and New Zealand parties. Also, people still remember, and will always remember, that France sponsored a terrorist attack on the Rainbow Warrior in 1985.

I'm more an outdoor type than a city person. I wasn't interested in visiting the charmless towns, except the street food markets. I was more into the mountains. I started out making a trekking pole out of a bamboo branch. The hikes were full of discoveries. The forests have lots of tasty exotic fruits, like papaya, mango, and lychee. I also found pineapples and coconut trees, as well as the Notou birds (ducula goliath) and Cagou birds (rhynochetos jubatus). Unfortunately, my skin degraded day by day with eczema. It got so bad it was painful to walk. The subtropical weather, the heat and humidity, just wasn't for me. Also, my New Zealand clothes didn't really fit the climate. I was not prepared for this, yet I learnt and managed to hitchhike and hike around the island for three weeks. If I'd been better prepared, I could have experienced more.

On the one hand, the island is a natural beauty. On the other hand, the current situation is on the edge of collapse, it isn't far from civil war, and there's extreme inequality. The mining industry is destroying nature, but most of the exports are nickel. Fishing and livestock are small players in the economy. The poor infrastructure, the expensive flights and living costs mean the island is not a tourist hotspot. The unsustainable economy is relying on French support. For me, visiting this island was a once-in-a-lifetime experience.
