# Indonesia

Travelling to an unknown destination with unfamiliar habits is like having sex for the first time. I barely knew where I was going to and how to deal with the attractive discovery, meandering all details from the highway to the bush, better free but covered against unnecessary risks. Whatever the time spent, it is always too quick. But it changes your point of view, and you cannot wait for the next exciting and surprising visit to find out more with deeper investigations, opening your mind to more or less exotic dreams.

### Culturally Lost

In the Bali Denpassar airport, an awful lot of taxi drivers tried to do business with me, but even if I wanted to, I did not know where to go. I tried hitchhiking and realised that taxi “is a business here!” So I walked along the road, asked in Bahasa Indonesian where the visitor centre was, but even the body language was hard to understand. I finally got a map of Bali in Korean.

Road safety did not seem a priority and rubbish was out of hand. I realised how unpredictable was the afternoon weather, blue sky with sporadic heavy rain. Motorbikes often tried to do business with any foreigner walking on the unfinished or broken pavement. One looked friendly, so I asked him where I could find a guesthouse for 100k, so Stanley, from Sulawesi, gave me a free lift in motorbike to his house without a helmet. While helmet is compulsory for cycling in Victoria, Australia, helmet for bikers in Indonesia is optional. After a day, I did not find a useful map of Bali, and no one of Indonesia, as if Bali was not part of Indonesia. Stanley and his friend were kind, so kind that I was wondering if something dodgy would happen.

### Money Focused

Tourist information centres are helpless. So I went to a juice bar to have internet access, I drew a map of Indonesia with places to visit according to random blogs. Then I hitchhiked and many drivers offered me a lift at excessive tourist price. One, named Buda, gave me a free lift. He warned me I should rent a motorbike, “it is the way,” meaning my way of travelling is not suitable in Bali. He also advised me to **“trust no one”** now graved in my mind. He dropped me off near Denpassar airport, actually where I came from, whereas I was heading to Selat via Gianyar. The good point is that I knew better my situation. Again, I walked along the road and motorbikes slew down “bisa ikut gratis? – Haha! Of course not! You can take the bus to Gianyar, do you want a lift to the bus stop? – No thanks.” The bus went to Batubulan, once there, no bus service, nothing after 3pm. Side note, I found a pink chick in the Batubulan market, Indonesia is crazy!

I spent the rest of the day looking for accommodation, camping was not okay because of the weather and the lack of any green or safe spot. After having visited both dodgy and luxury hotel, I finally found one. Actually, one found me. He gave me a free lift to his guest house, a clean white building with sculptures. At that moment, I ignored the price and Gus said “150k?” so I answered “100k?”, he laughed and repeated “150k! It is actually 200k but you have a friend price! – Thanks, so why not 125k? – Haha! 150k. – 125k?!! – Hahaha! Okay! 125k. Come one, I'll show your room.” Air cond, two king beds, TV and a kind of bathroom, plus a mirror and a painting. Gus insisted that this place is safe. I smiled, thinking about the Buda advice “trust no one!” I was still lost, spending my time looking for my way, transportation and accommodation.

### Curiosity is Only Vanity

Breakfast was included with the room, so I started my day happy by tasting local stuff. Then I went back to the Batubulan bus station and was welcomed by a typical Balinese dude: machete, black hair and moustache, tanned skin, wearing a batik (a traditional shirt with a fancy pattern) and flip-flop. He did not speak English but pointed me a bus further on the other side of the road. I asked a girl managing tickets if the bus was going to Selat. So she babbled in Indonesian with three other guys, and the free-for-all conversation looked animated, but she finally offered me two options: either go to Klungkung, either Amlapura and then use a car or a motorbike. I chose the second one and jumped on the old bus. During that time, an inquisitive guy named Baidowi talked to me, curious about me as much as me about him.

Arrived in Amlapura, I went to a restaurant, people tried to explain all the food on the shelf. I knew it was not a touristic place by the friendly people and the fair price. I shared the meal with a local family who advised me to visit Tirtagangga and enjoy a panoramic view. I got a lift for “50k – 15k? – No – 20k! – Okay for 20k!” I truly enjoy negotiating. **Travelling my way through Bali is more expensive than New Zealand or Australia. The issue is not about money, but does my way of traveling make any sense now? Doubtful.**

### Toward Remoteness

Tirtagangga has a water temple I discovered the morning and spent the rest of the day contacting farmers via a Wwoofing website. Besides, I tasted local food with no real pleasure, but I loved juices. I found the best ones in Indonesia, and most of them are alcohol-free.

That day, I got a hot orange & honey juice and a positive answer for wwoofing in North Sumatra, so I also got a flight to Medan. Therefore, I went back to Amlapura the next day by mini bus. Negotiation was rude… “10k – 5k – 10k – 5k – 10k – 5k!” I gave him 6k and the driver agreed. **It is not a question of price but fair price. Locals increase rates for tourists, if he asked for 6k, I would say 3k.** I was carrying 1,500k anyway. Yes, I was crazy too! I found myself in front of two buses; the drivers were in competition, trying to get me in. I did not try comparative negotiation but simply jumped in the one ready to go.

Back to Batubulan, I stopped in a shop, got a cappuccino bubble and another one with cinggau. I was conversing with a guy speaking barely English, so I tried talking Indonesian. I learnt more in three days than Hebrew in three months in Israel, where my goal was to understand the culture and way of thinking. In Indonesia, I also wanted to share their lives.

I found a hostel back to Legian. Then I walked along the beach; rubbishes were gathered like sand castles, crowded of tourists and businesses devoted to them. I spent the next morning to find the immigration office where I realised that buying a second month visa was not as easy because I needed to stay in one place and go to the immigration office of that place. I spent the tiring afternoon lost, finding my hostel. I could spend days hiking the bush but hours in Legian streets were hell. “Where? – … – Wherrre? – … – Where are you going? – Tidah butuh taksi! – Han!” another one literally cried “YES! Taxi?” so I loudly answered “NO! Taxi!” they laughed, I made a nervous smile. I was in North Sumatra the next day.

In the airport, three young Muslim girls sat down on a bench. They had superb smiles and coloured jilhabs, well-dressed to meet their mother. “Where are you going? – Samosir Island! – Oh! This lake is cold and dirty!” I was impressed about their English, superior to mine at their ages. On the other hand, they were surprised I can say basic words in Arabic and a few sentences in Indonesian.

Early morning, I took the first bus to Amplar, another one to Ajibata, then the ferry to Tomok. There someone said no bus went to Silimalombu today, but I could have a ride in motorbike for 100k. There was actually a bus, full inside with elderly and full on the roof with kids. I joined them and carefully watched the unsafe gravel road, I had to lay down from time to time, to avoid tree and electric cables. Once arrived, I did not know how much money the driver wanted, I gave 10k and he thanked me. I continued walking toward the remote village and there I was!

### Wwoofing in North Sumatra

The village is Silimalombu, in Samosir Island, surrounded by Lake Toba in North Sumatra. My job consisted in cleaning spaces, digging seeds, destroying a shelter, removing plants from the garden and underwater, cutting trees, and most of my time deforesting the jungle. Hard to take initiatives, to understand the *why*, no one could speak English! **My weak ability in speaking Indonesian unsatisfied my desire of being as helpful as wished, leading my work meaningless to myself.**

One afternoon, a mate asked me to climb a coconut tree, but I had no idea how to do so. He made it and threw the coconuts to me. Then I learnt how to cut them. Food was the same, breakfast, lunch, dinner: rice and fish from the lake with sauce (better than my muesli). I carefully watched how the fish was cut and compared it to how William, my Kiwi friend, did. The New Zealand way consisted in (1) killing the fish by cutting its throat and removing the abdomen, (2) throwing away tail and head and (3) slicing along the spine on both sides so all bones are removed. The Indonesian way consisted in (1) cutting all tails completely, (2) removing scales partially by scratching in the wrong way and (3) slicing and removing the abdomen. That way, the head is part of the meal, including bones and eyes.

During my stay, the house hosted a young girl, three boys working for Ratna, and an elderly lady managing everyone. A road joined the two buildings under a sculpted and painted roof. One with the kitchen, the chickens and ducks, the dining room and one bedroom for girls. The other one with the living room, the bedrooms for boys and the bathrooms. The kitchen was made of black wood with one window without a view except through the pigs that would finish a day or another in the pot. Many flies were there! The light came from a bulb, mighty as a candle, not enough to see the colourful species. The dining room was decorated with family pictures such as a son looking proud, wearing a school uniform with a piece of paper in his hand. They were paintings on four walls, with a rainbow, a coconut tree and buffaloes. Many species on a shelf, with teh and kopi. The living room was composed of a TV and a parabole, three chairs made of bamboo (where I enjoyed sitting down, thinking and watching the lake, majestic birds, mountains), the other kitchen was used for making tea and coffee, plus two unused barges, and interesting lights made of bamboo and white LEDs. Our bedrooms were next door with the bathrooms. In-between is a bath, mind the gap or fall into half-dead lobsters! The bathroom was typical, the toilet is flushed with a cup from the bucket of water – as clean and cold as the lake – used for washing the body. No paper toilet, so I used my hand for shit. My bedroom, with a simple mattress, was newly painted in yellow, the warmest liveable space of the house, crowded with mosquitoes. A couple of electric cables maintained an orange curtain on the large window with a pretty view of lake Toba. Fish, buffalo, eceng, veggies, chickens and duck families, wood stock, motorcycles and mucks were in the garden, surrounding the house.

### “Saya Mau ke Medan, Besok Pagi.”

One evening, I explained I would like to leave Silimalombu the next morning. After breakfast, I jumped on Marta, a pink, blue and green wood made boat. I put my backpack beside a bag full of fresh fish making sporadic movements. Then I travelled for five to six hours on the public bus to Medan. Merchants were selling food at the main stops, the bus became a noisy trading floor for a few seconds. A girl behind me started conversing, always smiling and laughing. Lisna (Christian about thirty) offered me to stay in her friend's house in Bromo, a quarter of Medan. In the mini bus, a 19-year-old girl in jilhab named Mia, speaking English fluently, asked my non-existent phone number to hang out altogether that evening. Fortunately, Lisna was there, and we met her in Yuki, near Bromo. The friend of Lisna has a 4-year-old boy, a 2-year-old girl, and one would come soon.

The first questions asked depend on the culture, so except the where-are-you-from question, there are no worldwide rules. After months of travelling, **I can say that the more religious someone is, the nicer he is.** New Zealanders talk about religion later in the conversation but at the beginning when it comes to Indonesians and Israelis. They hardly believed me when I declared I am godless, that is forbidden, just six official religions are actually allowed.

In the morning, we got takeaways, rice with stuff packed in a large leave covered by a piece of paper. Then Lisna taught me how to clean my clothes by hand because three days were required to clean it at the laundry. At last, we went to Puri and found a guest house (100k a night) thanks to Lisna and her friends who talked to locals, the way to do. We had lunch in Yuki and wandered in a mall.

### Love Ever, Hurt Never

Even locals get lost in Medan. The driver asked on the street the way to go to a specific address with orientation details I wrote in Indonesian on a piece of paper from what Erica said. I arrived late, she warmly welcomed me. She is a couchsurfer. I do not dislike that web network but avoid online activities when travelling. Erica and I talked about our life the whole evening. She advised me to visit the Mansion, so she dropped me off there (with the typical motorcycle) after a stop to the Buddhist place were Chinese pray. In the Mansion, I asked the guide **“do you like your country? — I love Indonesia! We are rich in everything, the culture is great, and nature is gorgeous. We could be richer if only the government would act properly.”**

Erica drew me a map to join her in a coffee shop. As usual, I tasted original things, a white chocolate chip blended with cream and ice, then a rum raisin ice coffee. We went in a park by night, as vast as a football field surrounded by trees, crowded with Indonesians, but no Chinese except Erica, perhaps because I was there. Chinese are teased and do not feel safe there, “they are not really Indonesians.” We got noodles in a restaurant and talked about our travels.

My next day was even more into her daily life, spending the whole morning in a Buddhist temple. Erica was teaching English and the meaning of giving a topic of this Sunday school class. **“We can give energy, money, hard work or just a simple smile!” – Erica.** The kids' questions (about the ideas shared, the praying, the customs) where simple but hard to answer.

Erica's wisdom and open mind made my days with her meaningful and unforgettable. She loves her country because she learns many things to make the world better, and she honestly does. I am really impressed about her strongness, motivation, and everything she does to help kids and those who need help, by teaching, building bridges, water supply systems, etc. For example, she spent eight months teaching poor children – who did not speak English, nor Indonesian, nor Batak, and did not have enough money to buy sandals – in a classroom without blackboard, on a remote island with daily small earthquake. She also spent a week during vacation in an orphanage, helping the disabled with nuns. At the moment, she was making posters for her next event consisting of gathering doctors, policemen, engineers and other professions with kids to motivate them of continuing studying. **Indeed, good education is the key for a better world altogether.** Erica is the bravest human being I have ever met, sociable, honest, kind, smiling, with a simple life and big dreams, giving to others first.
