# Rees, Lochnagar, Dart

If I wasn’t lucky, I would be dead in the middle of nowhere. I made some mistakes on this tramp, especially around Lochnagar in Mt Aspiring National Park, at least I found the most stunning view.

As usual before any tramp, I’ve visited the DOC site to find out the latest alerts, track conditions, weather forecast, and get topo50 maps. That time, I met a serious tramper curious about my intentions. I said “I plan to do the Rees and Dart circuit. – Well, I would advise you to go to Cascade Saddle, which is more scenic. How many days do you have? – Unlimited! – Then go to Lochnagar and back to Dart via Snowy Creek, that’s a nice circuit! – Well, there is no track! – It’s doable… Enjoy your tramp!” What first meant to be a nice walk on a well-marked track became the first and longest multi-day bushwalk I’ve ever made.

I left Queenstown with the feeling of engaging myself into something too risky. I was as calm as a mountain lake, feeling super worried, but not hesitating in the least what became my real challenge.

*Day 1:* First and foremost, I walked along the Rees river, 800 m below the surrounding peaks. The valley is bluffy. I was especially amazed by the countless waterfalls from Earnslow Peak and others hidden in the forest. It wasn’t just a nice view but nice clouds, streams and weather conditions – warm and sunny. I cleaned my clothes in a stream and free camped just before the Rees Saddle.
*Day 2:* When I walked to Cascade Saddle, I realised that the beauty of nature is like imagination: limitless. “When you see without feeling, you are still partly blind; you lack the inner light that brings awareness. Awareness requires the interplay of every faculty, the use of your entire being as an eye.” – Feel The Earth by Charles Lindbergh. The Dart Glacier, the never ending waterfall (Heads Leap), the mountain ranges, altogether with the challenging access made my heart pounding. If you never had that feeling with nature, imaging kissing your loved one. I am living for real when I feel my heart pounding, when I’m emotionally and physically strengthened, when something remarkable is happening. I had great weather again and free camped next to the Saddle. Keas torn my tent on multiple points. I should have kept my food safe in my backpack instead of my tent.
*Day 3:* I’ve been 220 m up hill, 1,360 m steeply down hill through the infamous Cascade Saddle Route, and up again for 1,040 m on the Shotover Saddle Route. The difficulties were the fair distance between poles, rabbit and sheep tracks diverting the barely visible route, and the steep and steady ascent. It was therefore the perfect test before the real bushwalk. Indeed, engagement were minimal so far, with easy backup – hut, track and a 4WD road. Next step were something else.
*Day 4:* The descent from Shotover Saddle to Tummel Burn Hut via the Tyndall Creek was bloody hell. First, I went down hill next to the stream easy to cross. Then I continued along the stream bed which became bigger and bigger. Finally, I could see Junction Flat where the hut is located, 200 m far from where I realised that… I trapped myself in a gorge. I under-estimated the high risk of boulder hopping and the power of water flow. I slipped into the freezing cold river, deep enough not to touch ground, my head was underwater. I swam and grasped a large rock. When I raised myself, I was feeling fool and lucky: no broken bones, not drowned or cold dead, just alive! I made a critical navigation and decision-making mistake… but I am alive!
*Day 5:* Due to the rainy morning, I’ve waited the afternoon to cross the river and keep going through the Shotover valley and Lochnagar Hut. There I met a party of four trampers, heading like me to Dart Hut the next day. I pitched my tent next to the full hut and asked them their way. One said “we have a guide! – Who is the guide?! – No I mean we have a guide book. – Ah!” My first mistake was to ignore the existence and necessity of a guide book for navigation. I should have carried a copy of the area. Fortunately, they shew me their copy of the Moir’s Guide and read the hut intentions book. I took pictures of the useful pages and took some notes on my Topo50 map (bearings and turnings.) I realised that my first plan would be an other navigation mistake.
*Day 6:* The first day of the year was an other amazing, exciting and scaring day. I had great weather on my way to Snowy Creek. I had the feeling of being above everything at 2,060 m-high – I could see the never ending valleys and countless peaks. It was steep, very steep and I took extra care to avoid a fair drop. That helped me to keep focus on each step. I always had a hand grasping tussock, but most of my way was on scree. I walked back a few times where the next step was too hard, and I always found safer alternatives. The sections on snow were fortunately flat and short, okay without crampons. I free camped next to the lonely cairn in Snowy Creek.
*Day 7:* I walked along Snowy Creek and up to the elevation line 1,500 to reach Rees Saddle and avoid – this time – a gorge. Back to the track, I became more aware of the environment than on my first pass on the saddle. As if my eyes were more open than ever.
*Day 8:* That day was a typical tramping day. I got a lift at the end of the track, heading to my next tramp after a recharge in Te Anau.
