# Ruskadventure

This is my first experience in Lapland, a hike in autumn when the forest is rich of colours, berries, and wildlife, after the mosquitoes season, and before the snow. Now living in Finland, Lapland is a natural destination for me.

I was thinking so much about nature that I forgot to bring food for the day trip from home to the park. No, I didn't use my camping gear in the bus. Instead, I enjoyed a typical Finnish filtered coffee and donut. For lunch, I ordered the only vegetarian meal of the only restaurant along the road, it was an omelette with berry jam on side, similarly to Kiwis – New Zealand people –, those Finnish like savoury/sugary mix. Great! Me too. I was eating rather fast, feeling in a rush to start hiking – blue sky, colourful forest, full excitement. I hitchhiked the last kilometres to start walking from Pallas. Whereas most Fins speak English very well, older people from the countryside do not. It is not a lack of knowledge from them, but me. Learning the basic is not just useful but also important. A language contains both the history and culture of a country.  

Since it was my first hike in Lapland, I started from a well-marked track before going off-track, which is always the most interesting and satisfying part. It was nice talking with people on my way but once off-track, it was just me and wildlife, squirrels, birds, reindeer, elk. When I first faced a wild reindeer, I was feeling on a different planet, it was starring at me peacefully with its white face and brown fur, standing on the red carpet of berries. The meeting with the elk was quite short, it made a strong noise and ran away. I had great weather at the beginning. I camped above the bush line to enjoy the sunset, the milky way, and the sunrise. Finland is known to be a cold country. Whereas it was mid september, I was wearing only one layer of cloth, but not any layer, my merino wool from southern New Zealand. The clouds finally covered the sky and the rain fell, from patchy to widespread.

About navigation, I've to confess that the topographic maps of Finland are of top quality, but my capability to read the natural features was rather poor. I could not expect much from a first trip in the region. Swamps replace mountains I am used to. To make it trickier, my compass did not spin. It's a compass intended to work anywhere in the world, whatever the magnetic field intensity. I've tested it at home, but it seems to break only when the temperature drops. That was annoying not to be able to use it as bearing. My handheld GPS was enough, but I forgot to calibrate the compass, so I found my way based on my trace and triangulated myself with the natural features. I said *off-track*, but I surprisingly found a path, actually many paths. However, by the look of the footprints, the amount of shit without paper toilet, and the multiplication of tracks, I was convinced that it wasn't human tracks, but reindeer's. I learnt the meaning of every topographic details the hard way, white is open forest, easy as; light blue is wet shrub where you can play brick jump (keep moving or dive); light brown is swamp to avoid; dashed areas mean *don't even try*.

The Pulju Wilderness Area is a labyrinth of swamps, and the widespread rain didn't help. On the other hand, I found many camping spots, flat and covered of moss – making a natural mattress – good for my feet and my back. Unfortunately, my tent is quite small and my sleeping bag touched the walls, increasing humidity, and degrading the sleeping bag performance where it should be the most effective, my feet. I could not complain, I was where I wanted to be.

The discovery of Lapland raised my interest in the Finland environment, culture, and lifestyle. I can't wait to discover more of this region, from both people and nature.
