# Cooking Challenge

I spent the first and last dollars in accommodation. I saved enough money to be able to forget it. Traveling without spending money has never been my goal. But why should I spend money for a comfy bed when I could stay in my tent for free? My laziness pushed me to do so, one night in one year of accumulated travel.

I spent time in Greymouth looking for backcountry recipes, food, a frying pan and a water bottle used to carry eggs. I felt slightly society-lagged and could not sleep in the dorm room. So I organised my food in the middle of the night, packing stuff in resealable bags. Then I had a brilliant idea: giving to myself a new challenge consisting of going tramping with only basic, raw ingredients and simple mixes, no energy balls, no bread, no fancy granola, no caramelised or roasted nuts. I would bake my own bread instead, and cook my porridge.

I was faster than expected so I planned other tramps before the Dusky Track. I found a good looking hut in a postcard and that was enough motivation to go there – Kirwan’s Hut. I met a fisherman in the backpacker who forgot his life jacket. Weather was terrible, heavy rain and gale, so David drove back to his home and gave me a lift to Reefton. Here I met Enett, David’s friend, who asked my plan: go to Blacks Point, pitch my tent and start the Kirwan’s Circuit the next day. She felt sad for me and offered me to stay at her place. So I had a king meal and a queen bed. I fixed her TV in exchange.

I started tramping in the Victoria Conservation Park through the Murray Creek Track, all streams were flooded. One creek was trickier. I tried further up and down, but impassable to cross safely with a strong pole. I pitched my tent on high ground and waited until next morning. I baked bread for lunch, topped with Cheddar cheese and Marmite. It’s filling and tasty for a camp meal but cooking isn’t easy in a small tent. I had pasta with pine nuts, walnuts and pesto sauce for tea, cooked with rain water from my tent fly.

The stream next morning was much friendlier, easy to cross without pole. I found a large frying pan in Montgomerie Hut and practiced. I baked two tasty pizzas in three hours. The base was made of plain flour, baking powder and canola oil. All covered of melted cheese, eggs, olive dukkah mix and Marmite. I have to admit it is gas, water and time consuming. I baked camp scones later on, filled with sultanas, chopped dates and cacao powder. It was surprisingly fast to bake – 1 min 30 sec – with no mess and only based on dry ingredients plus water from the river. I ate so much that I got sick, leaking nose, headache, feeling weak, low hearing.

I walked to Kirwan’s Hut and ran out of flour. End of story.
