# Kilpisjärvi to Abisko

After a shaky and noisy night in a train cabin, a lunch at the Muonio birdwatching tower, and a bus ride, I finally arrived in Kilpisjärvi, where camping is not free according to the tourist centre. I walked a few hundred meters and pitched my tent in the forest, for free. It felt good to be back in nature. I missed the sound of the river, the shape of the mountains, the smell of the wood, and the fresh air. My plan was to go from Kilpisjärvi to Abisko. I chose this area because there are lakes and mountains, no roads, no buildings, and it is not far from where I live to avoid wasting CO2e.

*Day 1:* The walk went through the Malla strict nature reserve, past a couple of attractive tarns, and alongside a waterfall. From the Finland-Sweden-Norway border, I continued to Lake Kilpisjärvi, where I inflated my packraft. My backpack was half my weight, so I felt light and free as I paddled on the lake. The spraydeck on my packraft was not enough to keep me dry in the heavy rain, but it was enough to keep me warm and shelter me from the wind. I continued on until I found a nice camping spot for the night. When the rain stopped, I picked some blueberries for my morning porridge.

*Day 2:* There was a slight breeze, nice-looking clouds, and great weather conditions for paddling. The scenery was diverse, including a lake, a wide river, hills, mountains, a marsh, and a twisting stream at the lake's exit. I could hear more noise, and see more rocks and whitewater. I did not venture any further into the water and instead portaged a few hundred meters. When alone, it's better to level down. If I were with others, I would do the same. I chose packrafting not for the fun whitewater experience, but to go where I could not reach on foot. On shore, I was swarmed by mosquitoes. I think they are a necessary evil. Without them, people would settle down too easily and disturb nature.

*Day 3:* It was a sunny day. I was sweaty in my rain jacket, but it protected me from mosquitoes. The heavy load made the hike difficult, whereas the packraft made some sections easy and enjoyable. The waves got bigger, but I only stopped paddling when it was late enough. I found a great camping spot with a 360-degree view, full of cloudberries, exposed from the wind, therefore away from mosquitoes.

*Day 4:* Usually, my porridge has a fresh topping, but sometimes I have so many berries that it ends up being more like a warm berry soup. In the city, berries are the most expensive ingredients, but in the wilderness, they are free. I continued paddling across the placid lake, toward the snow-capped mountains. Yellow cairns marked the border between Sweden and Norway, reminding me how peaceful it is. I wish Palestinians could feel the same. My heavy backpack continued to hurt, but thanks to my gear, I could self-sufficiently travel alone through wide lakes, shallow rivers, swamps, and mountains. I felt empowered!

*Day 5:* I started the day above the tree line, surrounded by berries. I hiked downhill through small bush, birch trees, and pines. The bottom of the valley had rather dense vegetation, which was the most challenging part. It was steep, with no track or guide. I like trips like that: going through tracks to enjoy the scenery and go fast, connected with sections of pure wilderness that are unmarked, unrated, and unreviewed, where satellite imagery and topographic maps are the only sources of information.

*Day 6:* The stream was looking engorged and I didn't want to repeat [my mistake](story:Rees_Lochnagar_Dart), so I decided to go up. It was actually more challenging to go sideways than to go all the way up, so I went to the foggy summit and down the other side, where the terrain looked nicer and there were visible tracks in the valley. I pitched my tent at the bottom of a summit that I was planning to reach the next day.

*Day 7:* I waited in my tent for the rain and wind to stop. At about lunchtime, I gave up because it might not be possible to go up from 670 m to Njunis (1,717 m) and back down before dark. As I started packing up, I noticed a small patch of blue sky, and the rain had become just a drizzle. So, I attempted the summit. Halfway up, the weather worsened: thicker fog, stronger wind, and slippery rocks made progress difficult. There were still hundreds of meters of elevation to climb. I could certainly continue, but what about the way down? Reaching the summit is only half the challenge. I learned from [my mistake](story:Whitish_Dusk) that the weather high up can be much worse, and that the weather can change very quickly for better or worse. I turned back and found a better way down. When I got back to my tent, I could still see a patch of blue sky, but the summit was in the clouds. One side of a valley can have nice weather, while the other side can have bad weather. In other words, the weather here is very localized.

*Day 8:* Paddling on the Máttajohka River was really nice and peaceful. Then, I continued on to Ánjajávri Lake. The water was too shallow at the lake's exit, so I packed up and found a path leading to the famous Nordkalottleden trail. The weather was nice, but the wind was strong. My 862-gram tent held up very well. I was disappointed by this tent on a [previous trip](story:Ruskadventure) because it didn't keep my sleeping bag dry. However, I felt much better on this trip, probably because I was more exposed; the wind and lack of trees provided ventilation. If pitched tightly, the outer and inner walls do not touch, ensuring a dry space.

*Day 9:* The Nordkalottleden is well-marked and easy to follow despite the fog and rain. It passes through beautiful, diverse terrain. Since I arrived early, I stopped at the Gaskashytta hut.

*Day 10:* The problem with a cozy hut is that it's hard to leave. At around 7 a.m., I headed to Lake Álddesjávri. It was my first multi-day packrafting trip, and I learned as I went along. I had attached my backpack to the tail, but the wind kept turning me sideways. I guess the backpack acted like a sail. I didn't think about that and just put the backpack behind me to have clear visibility in front. I landed in Storbukta, hiked a few kilometers, and switched back to the packraft when the river was more attractive than the swampy bush. I was glad it was raining because the water was shallow, but the strong wind forced me to stop and walk. I felt really alive when I almost capsized. On the other hand, the bad weather made beautiful rainbows. I was also amazed by all the birds I saw in Hávgavuopmi that day. Due to the bush and lack of berries, I hiked uphill to camp above the tree line. The difference in vegetation from one spot to another was striking. Another surprising thing was the fresh snow on the Bihppáš mountains below 1,500 meters.

*Day 11:* Walking all day was anything but boring. I saw beautiful landscapes, waterfalls, peaceful tarns, mountains, reindeer, and birds.

*Day 12:* The Duortnosjávri is a long narrow lake, almost 50 km in length. Long open water together with wind can create waves, making the crossing more difficult and risky. Fortunately, the wind was gentle. I felt relieved after the crossing. I made it all the way, without losing my paddle or packraft and without capsizing. Even though it was still summer time, the water was cold. On my [next trip](story:Sarek_Together), I attempted to cross a river that was only hip-deep, but I was freezing. Capsizing in such water, with wind and waves, would have been quite the experience! I followed the plan pretty well, and I made it on time. I had a warm lunch with my extra dinner food and finished the hike in Stordalen. Part of the nature reserve was very dry. Another part was swampy and covered in cloudberries.

I hitchhiked to Kiruna, a town where people have to move their house because the mine is causing landslide risk. Gällivare has the same problem. From reading my stories and looking at my photos from Norway and Sweden, it might seem like the Nordic countries are natural paradises. However, only 13% of the Sweden area is *protected*, and the mining, fossil fuel, and fishing industries are unsustainable.
