# Kind Of Sabine Circuit

I got food for a week, hitched to Mt Robert carpark and tramped to Angelus Hut with a barely idea of my intentions. I spent three hours making mixes in the hut – 5x3 savoury scones, 3x3 super sweet scones, 8 porridges. I made up my mind with tea from manuka leaves I found on my way. My plan was to go to Upper Travers Hut through Cascade Track. Sunset Saddle wasn’t safe at the moment because of the snow.

I found many waterfalls on the steep section above the bushline and I had a nice treat in Pancake Flat. My pancake was tasty with Marmite and melting Blue cheese on top. The cooking challenge continued. I wrote “cooking & reading” in the intentions book of Upper Travers Hut. I do have to diversify my activities to avoid boreness, otherwise each day’s march would be a matter of mere routine like going to work at the office. Meanwhile, I found the largest buttercup flowers around the hut and the most disturbing alert. That was about a missing tramper last seen in the hut a year ago. His backpack was found later on Travers Saddle. Tramping – even for a weekend trip – without carrying a backpack with safety gear, nor PLB, nor 1st aid kit, without letting someone knows your intentions is like walking to death, or having sex with someone you don’t know, without condom. That reminded me The Fire On The Snow by Douglas Stewart: “They admit and accept the tragedy. They admit to themselves they knew he was walking to death when he slipped from the tent with his last few trivial words, and they admit, hardening their mouths, they could have stopped him.”

The six hours tramp to West Sabine Hut was pleasant and scenic, especially around the Travers Saddle with a view of Mt Travers, the Rainbow Pass and the Franklin Ridge. One section of the track in the beech forest was a crevasse thankfully bridged. I had a break in Scones Confluence – BS24 759487.

Tramping to Angelus Hut through Mt Cedric Route was technically easier than Cascade Route, but physically harder. It’s worth it with a great mystic view over lake Rotoroa through patchy fog. Low visibility on top made the next pole hard to see, a few sections were covered of snow and rain and wind didn’t help. With raincoat on, hood up, head down, the walk was rough but nice though.

I walked the next day on Speargrass Track and got a pizza in town for lunch. I’ve nice treats in town as well as in bush.