# Milford / Piopiotahi Track

The first day of the Milford Track started with a boat trip to Glade Wharf. It goes through a very narrow valley along the lake Te Anau, very steep bluff and many cliff toward the beginning of the track. Just a few steps and I found myself in the very mossy forest. I stayed overnight in the first hut. I’ve been woken up by the bell of a bellbird, and a fantail knocked a window of the 40-bunk hut. I was surrounded by a Tawhai / beech forest with patches of mataī, kākuka, rangiora, horoeka, kāmahi. The sunny day raised many birds and songs – weka, tomtit, wood pigeon, paradise duck, robin, and last but not least: a lonely blue duck / whio on lake Mintaro. I’ve never seen so many waterfalls in a single day. It made an exceptional scenery with massive cliff on both side of the valley with snowy tops. I found a couple of kākā on my way to the Mackinnon Pass. I had perfect weather conditions and a coffee on the pass – about 1,160 m. I could hear and see numerous avalanches far enough to stay safe. After the pass is a cool 580 m-high waterfall – the Sutherland Falls. For my last day, I’ve started tramping before sunrise, early enough to catch the water taxi. The choral of birds were amazing with many, many singers under the stars. Patches of drizzle made me feel even happier, reminding me how great was the last two days. Unbridged streams were easy to cross and not a bit of snow on the walkway, surprising for that period of the year when the Hump Ridge and the Roger Inlet tops were snowy. I’ve spotted a group of Tui and small rimu trees near the wharf, Sandfly Point. The Milford Track was a rest before the challenging tramps further north.