# Hiking Lyngen

Last winter I was wandering where to go. Somewhere in the north, somewhere I've never been before. I am attracted by mountains, their shapes, how they make nature harder to access, how they challenge my legs, the scenery from the valley, and the panoramic view at the top. I learnt about my limits from [my winter expedition](story:Winter_Immersion_in_Lapland). Pulling a 40 kg sled on steep terrain may be dangerous if not impossible. Some places that are inaccessible in winter become reachable in summer. End August, a friend and I visited the Lyngen Alps, with the plan of crossing the mountain range from north to south, after a quick visit to the nearby city of Tromsø. It's a touristic yet charming mid-sized city with a high number of coffee shops and art galleries per inhabitant. With so much to do in the city, so much food to taste, why to go hiking? To see beautiful landscapes, get closer to nature and wildlife. To be one with nature, my body, and my mind. It is a minimalist activity: carry only the essential. It is pushing my physical and mental limits, and it gives me time to think.

We took the boat to Nord Lenangen and started hiking up the hill with a beautiful weather. After a few minutes, we could see the idyllic valleys and sharp mountains, so different from Finland, therefore so memorable. Berries from the supermarket are very expensive and usually from overseas, as if the nordic countries do not have enough berries. However, before sleep, and every day of this hike, we picked up berries. The morning porridge is so much better with fresh berries! We happened to be there at the right time: no mosquitoes, the blueberry and raspberry season was finishing, the redberry season was just starting. Unfortunately, I didn't bring flour and oil for frying pancakes. It would have been too heavy. I was already carrying 6.7 kg of porridge, snack, mashed potatoes, and couscous.

The next day was mostly rainy and we stopped in Lyngstuva (3-bunk hut) for the night. The walk was on small hills. It is rewarding to be a photographer between sea and mountain. It provides many opportunities to capture the landscape. From the hut, we could see Vannøya, Arnøya, and other islands. Once at the northernmost point of Lyngen, we headed south every day.

Every day was rather similar but somehow different. Our routine was pretty consistent: we'd have porridge for breakfast, then go for the hike, have a snack, continue the hike, pick berries, eat dinner, set up camp, regardless the weather or our mood. Yet one of the least boring routine I ever had with many ups and downs, changing terrain from grass to forest to scree pushing me to have countless photography breaks. I was constantly stopping to take photos, because every day had something spectacular: peaks, lakes, glaciers, waterfalls. But why do I take photos? To stay close to the beautiful nature when I live in the city, and also to inspire you to discover your natural treasures, wherever you live. I capture the beautiful nature wherever I go, sometimes in my city park. My photos are not memorials of nature, but a reminder to take care of our ecosystem. Camping is also meaningful, questioning our needs and standard of living.

During this trip, the temperature was between 8°C and 22°C with an average of 15°C which was way too warm for my sleeping bag, which is rated 4°C in comfort temperature. I was hiking in a T-shirt or my Polartec against the wind. The ground was colourful: red, yellow, green leaves; red, blue, black berries. The bad weather also made the sky colourful: we saw a couple of rainbows. The wildlife was shy, there were some reindeer but mostly birds. Being between sea and mountain gives the opportunity to spot oystercatchers, sea gulls, eagles, ptarmigans.

My friend and I learnt from each other. She mastered the wild mushroom soup, picking up the good mushrooms, cooking carefully. It was a discovery for me. In Aotearoa New-Zealand, I used to brew tea with Manuka leaves from the forest, but I never dare to pick up mushrooms. I mastered the navigation. We were most of the time off-track. Thanks to my GPS and clear view over the mountain, it was usually easy to know where we were. The challenge was to know where to go. The terrain was forgiving, though. If we picked the wrong path, it was just a bit harder, with more rolling scree, more swamp, but no dead end. I disagree with the saying, “To go fast, go alone. To go far, go together.” I'd say, “To go fast, go alone, but happier together.”
