# Tararua & Levin

### Palmy to Levin

The section of Te Araroa between Palmy and Waikanae is 137 km long. I have to confess that I lost track a few times but my GPS helped me find my way. It was very helpful just knowing on which side of the track I was. However, my motivation was as bad as the weather, and I decided to have a break halfway through – 75 km – in Levin. If I could hear bird songs, if I could hear a Tui, if I could make myself a cup of coffee or tea, then I would be happy! But I could not. Four days in the Tararua Range challenged my resiliency, just one more time, but much worse happened in the next months.

### Levin’ a Dream

I was in Levin, looking for a book about edible plants when a lady in the bookshop realised that my tent is my shelter and the bush is my home. “Well, you can stay in my place!” So I went to her place the evening. That’s a typical NZ house, at least a century old with hundreds of books, some paintings, a warm fireplace and Dylan her cat. Sue always keeps a positive mood and a real smile that we all like. I guess she would do the 137 km tramp from Palmy to Waikanae with a weather-proof smile, if only she enjoyed tramping as much as cooking.

Roger, Sue's friend and furniture maker, joined us for coffee. Later on the conversation, Sue said “do you have a woofing job for Clement?” Indeed, I told her I like woofing when I’m not tramping. Roger, thinking, replied “yeah, I could find stuff to do for a couple of days.” I was ready next morning at 8am and spent my day wiping the ground and some furniture, loaning, vacuuming, and walking in the park with Ben, Roger’s dog, that was my break out of sawdust.

Roger lives with his fiancé Stephanie in a very nice house, kind of castle with a garden and many exotic trees. We could never run out of jobs to do in the workshop or the house – splitting firewood, gardening, removing spider’s webs. The couple of days became a couple of weeks. Despite hardworking all day, we had a break on Sunday and sometimes Saturday afternoon. We went to Waikarere beach, I learned the basic of fishing with a rode and caught a Kahawai! We walked together in the Tararua Range from time to time. I discovered another Kiwi lifestyle, had very good meals and a comfy bed. Woofing for Roger actually recharged myself, and I often asked for more to do, so that I’m never bored. When he asked me “would you like a woofing job? But you can take a rest if you want…” I never said no (except picking up eggs under chickens, something I considered disrespectful.) I need to feel and be useful. That’s real work! When I was electronics engineer, I only used my brain, but when it comes to making furniture, I used my brain, my hands, my body. But I have to confess that I was more Roger’s third and fourth hand than his second brain.

Roger offered me a hat for my birthday because I “really need one and the head needs to be warmed up when feeling cold.” Then I kept my Possum hat for all my tramps. Now it’s not just my super warm hat made in New Zealand, it also reminds me of my friends and tramping adventures, it became one of my very few things I have a sentimental feeling – in addition to my Māori kit from Wairoa and my magnet from Sumatra. After woofing for more than three weeks, I’ve decided to go back to the bush and finish my intended tramp to Waikanae.

### Levin to Waikanae

The next section of the Tararua Range was a way steeper, and I grasped tussock to climb some sections, something actually not impressive but surprising at first. That time, I had good weather and stunning 360-degree lookouts where I could see Mt Tongariro far away. The view of my path through the mountain range made me feel satisfied. One afternoon, I was between low and high clouds at 1242 m-high (Nichols) and enjoyed a great sunset, when only peaks shew their faces. The fog entered the valley as a ghost, and darkness forced me to close my eyes and dream.

Once back at the bottom of the valley, I thought I had made the hardest part, but I was wrong. The track was hard to follow, and I fell about 4 m on a scree slope, luckily with no injury. I realised that leaving the track and following the Waitatapia stream bed was a better idea. Finally, the very last section was easy through exotic pines. I met a lady and her daughter walking a half day track. She considered me brave and offered me a lift to town. I texted “Everything OK” to Roger, and “Let’s meet up” to Sue. We went to an abstract art exhibition in Welly, and the Fishermans Restaurant along the coast, and back to her place before the next tramp further north.
