# Hiking Eastern Lapland

Walking is more than just moving one step after another. Preliminaries are as important as the act: gathering local information, logistics, map analysis and formatting GPS data, [cooking and preparing nutritionally balanced and tasty meals](https://fediverse.blog/~/ExploreWilder/Backcountry%20Cooking), and so on. I planned my trip weeks before the first step into the woods. It started from an idea: hiking a reasonably long route, as remote as possible in Lapland. The most untouched places are protected by the government and clearly marked on maps. Yet, it took me more time to gather information about the area than the actual trip. How to go there? When? How to get a resupply package somewhere to avoid carrying all my food? Are rivers cross-able? Are swamps passable? What weather and temperature to expect? What gear and clothes? What tracks? It would not be thru-hiking (following a predefined track) but rather a combination of tracks connected with off-track sections – usually the most interesting parts – planned with aerial images and topographic maps. A few days before the trip, I fell from my bicycle while looking for the ice cream truck. I had five stitches on my knee. Was it a sign that I should not go? No. Eleven days later, I stepped into the forest.

* **Day 1:** I used public transport only. First the train, then the bus from Rovaniemi (aka the Lapland capital) to Suvannantie (aka nowhere). I was the only backpacker in the bus, and probably the only hiker in the area during that colourful sunset. I was feeling in summer with clear sky, warm weather, and countless mosquitoes. [Ruska colours](story:Ruskadventure) were late this year.
* **Day 2:** I woke up with a blue sky, climbed a small yet dominating hill (Karhutunturi, 521 m), enjoyed a view over the never-ending forest, and ended the day under large but non-threatening clouds.
* **Day 3:** The sky was in perpetual metamorphose. The heavy morning clouds transformed into friendly little evening clouds. Deer, grouses, mosquitoes, sand-flies were around. I've been through a poorly maintained track, with rather broken duckboards and blink-and-you-miss-it sections. Squared markers are barely visible and missing bearing. New Zealanders are smarter using orange triangles pointing to the next marker.
* **Day 4:** The view on top of Sorsatunturi highlights the infinite pine forest scattered by rockies and wetland making diversity out of flat land. From here, Russia looks like Finland: peaceful and untouched. Such diversity makes the walk more entertaining but harder to find a nice camping spot, between rocky hills and swampy flats.
* **Day 5:** I walked rather fast because the track was in better shape, clean and well-marked. I usually pass huts without stopping preferring the freedom of my tent, but the wooden Murhahaara Hut was warm and welcoming. It has bunks with mattresses, a table with candles, a chimney, and a large map on the wall. The small window reduces light, helping me to sleep well.
* **Day 6:** I met two deer and bears hunters. They did not spot anything despite having a couple of dogs. Not surprising since bears are scarce and reindeer are gathered in dedicated area in summer time. On the other hand, blue and red berries were not lacking. A fest in the forest! Late afternoon, I saw a couple of swan on a remarkable mirror tarn. They flew away toward the heavy clouds before I could take the camera out of my backpack.
* **Day 7:** I arrived in [Tulppion Majat](https://tulppio.fi/): a camping with a burger restaurant and a sauna. I enjoyed a decent large Finnish coffee and bakeries, but I actually stopped there to collect my [resupply package of food](https://fediverse.blog/~/ExploreWilder/11%20Days%20of%20Food). There were different ways to cross the next river, too easy through the wading cable, too boring through the bridge, so I just walked through and got my boots and pant wet. The rain didn't help, but I've been rewarded in the evening by a [group of reindeer getting very close to me](https://p.lu/w/1wAAKSYngZddd3pNGxofkQ), making me feel part of their environment.
* **Day 8:** I often ran out of water, sources are doubtful and stagnant. The scattered rain was just enough to keep my boots wet. But I couldn't complain after so many sunny days. Plus, the sunshine after the rain is always remarkable: making leaves as bright as crystals. The weather conditions were good for awakening the living forest. I spotted many birds and deer.
* **Day 9:** The walk was finally rewarded with the sauna in Tahvontupa, located in a forest of tall pines. The heat was scattered by drizzle and a cold stream. After one hour and eighteen minutes of hot and cold sensations, I went to the hut, cooked mashed potatoes, and slept like a baby.
* **Day 10:** I could stay around the hut for days like the mouse and couple of squirrels living there, but I had to explore further. Hiking is living, pure nature is a treasure, and my cure. I was faster than expected thanks to the easy-going terrain and good weather, so I extended the route north of Hammaskuru Hut through a sandy road, a saddle with brownish grass, and a view over the mistic valley. I retrospectively regret crossing a sandy stream bare foot just to avoid getting my boots wet. A pinch of sand in your feet is painful in the long run.
* **Day 11:** I enjoyed my own company and sporadically met hunters and hikers. I could have the huts and sauna for myself. It has been quiet so far. But once I crossed Sokosti (718 m), I met countless hikers. Urho is the most popular national park, but most people stays in the official tourist zone, around Saariselkä. However, even the tourist area can be [very quiet in winter](story:Backcountry_Ski_Touring_Urho_Kekkonen).
* **Day 12:** The scattered rain was rhythming my day: walking under the rain, and photographing or picking berries under the sun.
* **Day 13:** Feeling colder every day. I went to an unnamed tarn, probably the prettiest. Maybe because it is off track. I continued all the way to Saariselkä. The small lakes were perfectly still and colourful during sunset. I arrived overnight, head torch on.
* **Day 14:** 4°C in the morning. I caught the bus to Rovaniemi.
* This trip in one word? Decent. I hiked more kilometers than usual, spent quite a few days and nights in my wet tent, and crossed a few streams. But no proper challenge in a way that nothing actually pushed my limits. However, the scenery and wildlife was memorable, with interesting terrain and vegetation. It was another point of view of the region compared to [last winter](story:Backcountry_Ski_Touring_Urho_Kekkonen). Hiking under the rain is annoying but rewarding. Hiking off-track is tough but eyes-sharpening.

You could feel scared of remote wilderness, but it is a good way to improve your self-confidence.
