# Dusky / Tamatea Track

I met a bunch of Kiwis on my way to Tui: a guy who seeded exotic plants on grassy hills, a fisherman who preferred to have a coffee with me rather than going to uni, two hunters, three young fellows who had been to a 21st birthday party, etc.

I’ve decided to be more rigorous and generous on food for the rugged Dusky Track. I did my porridge and scone mixes with a bit more of everything so that I would not complain to myself. Expecting flooded area, I had extra days of food. My snacks consisted of scroggin mix because it rains 300 days a year in the Tamatea / Dusky Sound area, therefore cooking for lunch might be tricky.

“Dusky Sound was named by Captain James Cook on his 1st voyage to New Zealand in 1770. He did not enter the fiord because it was getting dark and named it Dusky Bay. The Māori name for the fiord is Tamatea after the legendary explorer who traveled the full length of the North and South Island in his waka (canoe), the Takitimu.” source: DOC.

The Dusky Track adventure started with a scenic boat trip on Lake Hauroko. A few islands dash the deepest lake of New Zealand surrounded by bluffy high mountain ranges and waterfalls. I got wet socks even before the first step on the track. With no wharf, I jumped into swamp. Then I had been warmly welcome by a bunch of sandflies. The outside and inside of Hauroko Burn Hut was covered of those aggressively biting insects. I donated a book and spare food. Food for 11 days was enough, more would break my back. Then I hurried up along the well-marked track in the dense forest. Tree falls, roots, mud, and rough terrain… as expected. I was a hundred metres far from Halfway Hut when I had to cross a 1 m-deep, 3 m-wide stream with a fairly high current due to the last heavy rainy days. I could not walk through it. I found a couple of fallen trees a hundred metres downstream and played the clown. I walked on one tree, handled a branch in contact with another tree, and my other arm balancing my body.

I headed next day toward Lake Roe. I found Lake Laffy once above the bushline – from dense vegetation to clear overview. I had a short coffee break in the hut and walked around Lake Roe where I discovered several tarns and waterfalls.

I’ve decided to start tramping early morning because sandflies are still sleeping. I walked up hill from Lake Roe Hut and saw the spooky misty valley, a ghost was flying through and disappeared. Hills split shade and sunshine with a clear boundary. I could see Tamatea / Dusky Sound and Cooper Island from the Pleasant Range. That was a remarkable section of the track through more idyllic lakes. Then was a steep and steady climb downhill to Loch Maree Hut, standing along the slow flowing Seaforth River pouring out of the sound and the sea, I could see a waterfall, a drowned forest, Loch Maree, and the Kilcoy Mountains. It was sunny and the hut was pretty toasty.

The 5 hours tramp to Supper Cove Hut was straightforward. I spotted Kiwi footprints on the muddy track, a pretty bright-coloured waterfall, and some small caves blowing fresh air in the kind of tropical environment – warm and humid. The remote Supper Cove Hut is in front of the Duncans Seat with the Sound in-between. The Seat is a super steep bluff with trees growing on it. Shape of the intricated mountains of Fiordland redefines verticality, from geometry to mystic illusion. The Sound is a good spot for fishing in the channel – Spotty, Sea Perch, Blue Cod, Hapuka, Tarakihi, Red Cod, Red Gurnard, Blue Moki, Sand Flounder, Rig, etc. – or discover sea life – dolphins, fur seals, crested penguins, little blue penguins, visiting whales, red and black corals, seapens, etc. Resolution Island is less than 18 km far from here.

The coming low tide rose some black rocks covered of green moss and highlighted an alternative route back to Loch Maree Hut. I made some cairns on my way back because a recent slip cut the track. I had another night in the hut. Then I walked to the next one. On my way I saw the Rebecca Falls between twin peaks as a king on his oversized chair, I passed Gair Loch and a bunch of ducks, and I lost track, following footprints of someone who might have lost track too. I found my way back by tramping down hill, then toward the Seaforth River I could hear, and spotted the 3-wire bridge and some markers, at last, leading to the hut. I was wondering who would follow my footprints… To be honest, the track is well marked according to the backcountry standard which means that some sections may be blink-and-you-miss-it!

The track continued with many more surprises. I saw the Dingwall Mountains with different point of views. It seems to be a massive bluff from one spot, literally vertical on another spot, and then it was like inverted, as if the tops moved forward like trees on a lakeside. I actually had the same feeling in the Milford Track. Those fiords are like magnets: attractive and repulsive. The walk up to Centre Pass redefined steepness, again, through a steady root-way – similar to the iron-way but more natural, more the bush way, rough. As if the pass was not enough, I had decided to go off-track to reach Mt Memphis, part of the path was on snow. From the mount I could see all peaks around as well as lake Earnshaw and the Spey Valley.

I have been greeted every morning by a perfectly still valley and a blue sky. However, it was rainy most end afternoons, sometimes just a drizzle highlighting all shade of vivid green, sometimes a storm made me feel happy to stay in hut. Weather was surprisingly great most of the time (I had not used my raincoat at all), mud was only feet deep, most streams were bridged, sandflies weren’t worst than anywhere in Fiordland. The Dusky Track seems to be a rite of passage for many Kiwi trampers, fairly remote in wilderness. It made it worthwhile for me, privately, personally, to pass the rite. It was rather a mental challenge. I haven’t met a single human being along the track. A forest in Fiordland may look rather uniform and boring with just tall (up to 25 m) beech / tawhai trees but underneath those trees are all kind of vegetation and many birds with its diversity of songs, those peaceful creatures have a unique way of flying and living.
