# Matiri Ridge

I hitched to the beginning of the Matiri adventure and hiked to John Reid Hut – 7.6 km long, 1 km elevation. I’ve been woken up next early morning by the Blue Duck / Whio conservator, Jason, catching Kākā this time with Cory and Ajax – a famous Kea catcher dog who has its nation-wide published book Ajax the Kea Dog: A working dog's life in the high country entitled to his name. I tried to sleep two more hours until 6:30am, had breakfast and headed to the ridge through thick fog as clear as mud. Such weather makes navigation tricky, my GPS was very useful and made it easy! To be honest, a compass used for bearing would do it. Anyway, there were no cairns along the ridge rather broken, out of the beaten track, out of any route. I made a navigation mistake at some point. I found myself in front of the edge of steep bluffs several times, sidling south instead of the other side. Therefore tramping on steep scree up and down instead of following the contour elevation through tussock. The sky cleared later on the morning and a path was visible, even more on the west of Gibbs Route, passed pt 1566. I finally found a small cairn passed pt 1507 at BQ23 596156, an other one and finally some markers bellow the bushline down to Kiwi Saddle where I had cheese, butter and Vegemite on bread – in the shade, out of the wind, between tawhai trees and wren birds. I stopped in Kiwi Saddle Hut at 2pm, recharged my GPS and camera, sun dried my socks, shoes and sleeping bag, read, wrote, relaxed, admired trees and clouds, ate, slept. The hut is surrounded by Tawhai / Silver Beech, Tawhai Rauriki / Black Beech, Tawhai Rauriki / Mountain Beech, Kāpuka / Broadleaf, and those trees I don’t know the name, steeling my hat and scratching legs. The cloud formation and colours above Mt Luna were impressive, it’s probably very windy on top even though I was looking forward to reaching it the next day.

The walk from Kiwi to Wangapeka Saddle was kind of easy, some steep sections with bluff on both side, again, more than 1 km elevation, again, but I got used to it. I climbed Mt Luna and camped in the unofficial Wangapeka Saddle Campsite, where I found a dozen of wren.

Alarm set at 4am to start a long tramping day at first light at 6, I reached the bushline at 7. The next step along Nugget Knob was steep with bluff on both side and a view of the snowy Mt Luna and Mt Kendall made my heart pounding. Nugget Knob as well as Yuletide Peak were both harder than Cascade Saddle. It was like a via ferrata without ferrata, nor harness. Several ups and downs, walking, climbing, bush-bashing for nine hours. My only break consisted of a balanced diet: 72% Dark Gana and 28% White Chocolate Whittaker, thus 50%. I arrived at the last top of the ridge mid-afternoon from where I could feel on top of the world thanks to a 360°-panoramic view. I could see Lake Jeanette which reminded me that I ran out of water for a kilometre or so. Hurricane Hut was an hour far and 640 m downhill, in front of a big cliff, at the head of the Matiri river.

The overgrown track to McConchies Hut was confusing with markers leading to nowhere, or no markers at all. I read the whole 10-year old Intentions Book to plan the next part of my tramp. Many trampers recommended many different ways to go down from Larrikin Creek Hut, all of them confessed the “hard, long and scary” bush-bashing. Very few attempted the ascent, so I changed my plan. McConchies Hut has been visited by 364 trampers for the last 10 years, among them are 328 Kiwis, and 1 French. “It has been built in 1958. The first hut in New Zealand built with materials flown in by helicopter” (source: Shelter From The Storm, The Story of New Zealand's Backcountry Huts.)

In order to improve my map reading skills, I haven’t used my GPS for the third day, except to test myself by double checking my location.

The last day was easy peasy in cruise mode: the clean and flat track let my legs lead both my body and mind for 8h30 including an hour break.
